## Dear Soul

> I know, dear soul, that you have been in distress – in distress ever since you forgot Shabd and made friends with the mind.
> This fool, the mind, tied you down to the body and charmed you with sensual pleasures.… This time therefore you should remember God and go home, or you will continue wandering through the four forms of life.
> Attend satsang, seek your true destination and lose yourself in your Master’s love.
> The Master will help you find the jewel of Nam within yourself and retrace your way through the inner skies.
> Just do this now, in this very life, and the Master will take care of the rest.
> Act on Radha Soami’s advice to end your pains and find your way to peace.

<sub><sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub></sub>

<sub>January 2011 3</sub>

## The Broken Straw

Soami Ji Maharaj relates the following story:

> Some people say to a Satguru, “Here I break a piece of straw. If you are a perfect Satguru, make it whole again.” The Satguru replies; “Ask him whom you believe to be Brahm to make whole the broken straw. If he makes it whole, I too shall do it.”
> <sub><sub>_Sar Bachan Prose_</sub></sub>

The saints never allow themselves to be drawn into trivial discussions or proofs of the existence of God with insincere people. Christ demonstrates the same thing. When asked by Pontius Pilate “What is truth?” he offers no reply (Bible, John 18:38).

Soami Ji, in _Sar Bachan Prose,_ goes on to explain the real miracle that is performed by a perfect Master. He says:

> But if anyone loves the Satguru and believes in him, he will be brought back to life and the broken straw of his life will also be made whole.

Only the Master has the ability to accomplish this miracle: the mending of the broken connection between the soul and God. This is the only miracle worthy of the name. By comparison with this, so-called miracles that overpower the laws of nature are trivial. Miracles may excite the curiosity of the mind, but they do nothing to make the soul whole. They do nothing to solve the central problem of life, which is to reunite the soul with its source. Our main problem is to remove whatever stands between us and God. This is the work of which

Maharaj Sawan Singh writes: “This done, all is done; this not done, all else done is as if nothing is done” (_Spiritual Gems_). This is the only work that gives us permanent satisfaction.

What then is it that stands between us and God? One is tempted to be glib and say, “we do”, and this would be quite right. Masters who have won their freedom from the net of the material creation have all said that it is our desires for the illusions of this creation that imprison us. This was the second of the four Noble Truths of the Buddha (_The Connected Discourses of the Buddha_). Christ says the same thing: “No man can serve two masters” (Bible, Matthew 6:24).

It is a certain fact that one cannot travel in two directions at the same time, and yet this is what we are attempting to do until we whole-heartedly apply ourselves to solving the problem of our scattered mind and desires. We are hoping to reap the benefits of spiritual life while maintaining a covert allegiance to the world. This can never give us what we really want. Spirituality is like any other endeavour: We will get out of it what we put into it. If our effort is shallow and intermittent, we will receive shallow and intermittent results. We cannot just forcibly detach ourselves from our involvement in physical life.

Sincerity, and how that sincerity is compromised by our deep-seated desires for worldly gratification, becomes the issue.

All God-realized masters and saints have said that our ego is the chief obstacle to enlightenment. Ego is that which blinds us to the wonders of God and traps us in a self-created prison cell. Ego is the seductive voice that tells us that in separation from God we will find happiness and come to the fullness of our powers. Ego is the noise that fills our ears even as we try to attune ourselves to the Word of God.

How is it possible to overcome a foe that seems so central to our identity? The fact is that it is impossible for us to overcome the affliction of ego without the grace of the true Guru. We are adrift in the fearsome sea of the material creation, far from our real home. Our typical means of surviving the waves and tides of that immensity is to cling to the life-ring of the ego or sense of self. It is beyond our ability to voluntarily give up our grip on that life-ring. We can only release that grip when we find something surer to replace it. The Master comes into this world as the embodiment of that surer reality. From his unshakeable anchorage in the permanent, he offers a firm hand of support to the imperilled soul. He brings illumination and indicates a way of escape. Through his unique power, he activates a dormant capacity within the soul to rise up and cast off the shackles of the mind.

There are certain seeds that may remain seemingly inert for centuries, and yet when exposed to the vivifying elements of heat and moisture, they awaken and begin to grow. So it is with the slumbering soul when it is sparked into wakefulness by the power of the Guru. It awakens and seeks the Father whom it has forgotten.

As the “force that through the green fuse drives the flower” (_The Poems of Dylan Thomas_) causes the manifestation of life in this creation, so this life-giving impulse from the Master begins the manifestation of a new inner life for a disciple. This inner renewal is characterized by a slow but profound reorientation of consciousness, from a preoccupation with the outer world to a growing awareness of an inner reality. Like the flower turning slowly to face the sun, the face of the disciple gradually turns inward, towards the source of this light that is within. Thus does the miracle of bhakti, or devotion, appear within the embodied soul.

This bhakti is the natural magnetic attraction of the soul towards its home. Just as the unbound iron filing must fly to the magnet, so must the soul fly to its source if it is freed from the ties that bind it. It is this reunification of the fragment with the whole that is the mission of the saints. The object of Surat Shabd Yoga is to fuse the limited individual awareness or surat with the power of the Shabd or Word of God.

This fusion is no mere metaphor but is, in fact, the most profound experience for the disciple. To give an analogy: In this world, arc-welding is a process whereby an arc of high-voltage electricity is used to permanently fuse two pieces of the same type of metal into one whole. There can be no impurities or gaps in the welded seam. In like manner, the spiritual path is a process whereby the impurities in the disciple are burned away, so that this perfect fusion can occur. Thus does the disciple once and forever give up lesser identifications to become one with the imperishable reality.

Maharaj Charan Singh frequently declared, “Love means losing your identity to become another being” (_Legacy of Love_). Through the application of the divine spark conveyed by the Master, the attention of the disciple is fused with the Word of God within and thus transformed into a divine being fit to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. In this way, the broken straw of life is made whole.

## Much Ado About Nothing

Time is marching on and still we are pretending to be somebody. “Be bold enough to struggle,” he said.

‘Nobody son of nobody’ is not a poetic idea. It is the only Reality. Not the ‘reality’ of Reality TV.

The ideal of being a ‘nobody’ is a finger pointing beyond the illusion of being a somebody – the banner of the Visitors to a Foreign Land.

It’s time to get serious about being a nobody or we’ll end up becoming a real somebody, and that would be the grandfather of all catastrophes – Forever doomed to ‘many happy returns.’

‘Do you understand Spirituality?’ he asked.

It is freedom from everything, including our crystallization of ‘nothing.’

So, be confused, confounded and strongly rudderless. Out! Out of here!

Through this perfect everywhere. Gone!

## Embrace the Struggle

Maharaj Charan Singh was asked a question regarding the actual set amount of simran that an individual must do in his life. This was his answer:

> There’s no set amount. It’s a whole life of struggle – that’s the amount. A whole life of struggle. We have to withdraw our consciousness to the eye centre, and then we have to hold our consciousness there, that it may not slip down again. That is why it is a lifelong struggle.
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

Baba Ji was asked a question about ending this struggle and returning to our divine home. He was asked why the Lord doesn’t just take us in sooner rather than later, since this will happen eventually. He replied by saying something like he wished that it were so simple, but in time we will see that there is value in the struggle.

What could this mean? It seems that he is suggesting that we should embrace the struggle. Yet it is often so hard to grasp the value of struggle. Saints tell us that only in a human birth can we make true progress on our return home. Our daily effort is an ongoing investment into this return home. If we could truly see the potential at our fingertips we might respond differently to the challenge. It’s much like the experience of driving around the town we grew up in and seeing a big development on property that we could have purchased for next to nothing when we were younger. It seems so obvious in hindsight. But that is exactly the message regarding this human birth. We are guaranteed a huge return on our investment if we take some of today’s precious time and invest in the struggle before us.

Every great achievement has been accomplished by those who have accepted their struggle. The greatest athlete creates his winning ability by getting up every morning when no one is around to notice and pushing himself to the brink of his own limit. Then he repeats the task day after day as he slowly improves. With no guarantee of success, he puts on a pure demonstration of his ability to keep the struggle alive.

Or take the artist. We see the final painting and we think how talented the artist is. But there are very few artists who just paint a painting. A true artist keeps refining his work as he reaches for perfection. No one else may ever know what struggles he has had to resolve in the final work. His eye, his intent, his spirit cannot find satisfaction with his effort until the final piece reaches a goal that is personal to his pursuit of perfection.

When the question arises as to why the Master doesn’t just take us up now, the answer given most often is that we are not yet ready.

Perhaps the answer is that when we are ready, we will accept all that we encounter as his gift. And through this acceptance, we will understand that every effort we endure is a step closer in our return to the One. It is as simple a lesson as the one learned by Dorothy, the leading character in the movie _The Wizard of Oz._ Through all of her struggles, all she wanted was to go home to Kansas. When she finally reached the end of her journey, it turned out that all she had to do was click her heels together and home she went. She could have clicked her heels together any time and returned to Kansas, but that’s not the way it worked.

Only when she was ready, and when she had endured the challenges she encountered, did she become aware that she already possessed the means to go home. We are working with the same set of rules.

When we are ready, we will surrender and click our heels together, and Master will bring us home.

In Sant Mat we are dealing with an individual relationship between ourselves and our Creator. He has made us as we are. He has set this whole production up to benefit our growth while he nudges us forward. We are all putting in effort to increase our understanding, our love and our devotion. We are all being our best and doing our best today, right now. This is not about some future arrival into a reality of bliss. This is about who we are now. We are not here as a result of our failures or our successes; instead, we are here in his perfect timing and we will progress by his grace.

Masters have often emphasized that there are really just two things that we are responsible for: our effort and our attitude. They have asked that we put in our effort and trust our Creator regarding results. This is where a positive attitude is so important. It is up to us to abandon any preconceived ideas regarding results. We can simply practise seeing every event in life as an opportunity to trust in his plan and, therefore, believe in the necessity for things to work out as they will. This is the essence of a positive attitude. This is all his work.

Maharaj Charan Singh used to take great care in answering the same basic questions a thousand times in order to help us grasp the spiritual process we are in. He demonstrated his love and patience over and over and reached out to each questioner with a detailed answer that, if taken literally, would preclude any further thought on the question asked. This was wonderful. It was great that we had this information to feed our intellect and encourage our quest from within. But even this has its limits.

Our present Master has drawn a line in the sand and asked us to step across. He has asked us to quit analyzing these teachings and instead just live them. He has asked us to quit conceptualizing what

12 Spiritual Link love is and to take steps, through our meditation, that will help us to be in love. As our guide, he reaches out his hand to us and asks us to take action towards our objective. He asks us to trust in our purpose and believe in this journey. He does not point to a future arrival that will some day satisfy our needs; instead, he emphasizes the present moment.

In meditation, we are simply asked to be ourselves and to commune with our Master within, beyond thought, beyond intellectual perception. That’s all. This is an act of trust. Slowly detachment will come in its own time. Embrace the struggle. He knows what he is doing. This is why he smiles when he says to just let go and trust in the plan. If we only knew what he knows, we would laugh at ourselves for wasting time worrying about and questioning this destiny.

Let’s surrender to the struggle, click our heels together and go home.

> My Beloved, this torture and pain
> I suffer because I am so addicted to Your Beauty.
> People ask me whether I prefer Your company to being in heaven.
> Heedless fools, what would heaven itself mean Without the Friend’s Presence.
> <sub>_Nobody, Son of Nobody,_rendition by Vraje Abramian</sub>

## The Most Useful of Servants

Those aspects of our mind that are easily dissatisfied, restless, discouraged, fearful or brittle seem to reappear despite our best intentions. The saints, however, assure us that there is hope with the double-edged sword of the mind. Maharaj Charan Singh says this:

> Mind is the deadliest of foes, but the most useful of servants. When it turns wild and gets out of control, it heads for certain destruction. When properly awakened and controlled, there is no limit to what the mind can do.
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

So how exactly are we to encourage the mind to become our “most useful of servants”? In _Sar Bachan Prose,_ the restless and agitated mind is compared to an elephant in rut on a rampage of destruction, trampling everything in sight. Soami Ji Maharaj writes:

> The mind, intoxicated by the passions, as it is, can be controlled only by a person who has sincere longing to see the Lord. An elephant in rut roams about unrestrained in the forest and nobody can stop it. But under the goad of the elephant driver, the same mad elephant is tamed and used by the king for riding and thenceforth lives in comfort. Likewise, only the gurmukhs (those who are guided by the Guru) will be admitted to the mansion of the Lord.

Being guided by the Guru seems simple to understand; but it will take most of us a lifetime of effort to accept that guidance. The work begins with obedience.

> Leaving everything else aside, one must implicitly obey the Satguru of his own time, and faithfully follow his instructions. This will lead him to success. This is the long and short of everything.
> <sub><sub>_Sar Bachan Prose_</sub></sub>

And the instructions of all the spiritual teachers on this path are clear: do simran and bhajan, follow the vows, try your best. However, we can’t stop the wild and uncontrolled mind by ourselves, but we know someone who can help us. We are invited to take refuge with the Master.

> This world of sunshine and darkness can be crossed only by taking refuge in the company of the saints and carrying out their directions with love, faith and devotion. It is only when we give up the frail boat of the mind and step on to the seaworthy ship of the living Master that we can safely reach the shore of light, love and wisdom.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Discourses,_Vol. I</sub>

The mind has no power in comparison with the power of the Master. Following his instructions, accepting his protection, and taking refuge with his loving kindness, the mind will become what Maharaj Charan Singh has promised it will be: “the most useful of servants.”

## Name, the Guru’s Grace

There is but one God; true is his Name....

He is realized through the Guru’s grace.
> <sub>_Jap Ji: A Perspective_</sub>

These three lines from the Mool Mantra of Guru Nanak’s _Jap Ji_ express the essence of the teachings of the Gurus, which offer the promise of realization of the Lord’s Name through the Guru’s grace. A more beautiful and concise statement of the gift that all satsangis have been given is hard to imagine.

The first line, “There is but one God”, is a concept that doesn’t pose much of a problem for most people. However, while many millions of people embrace this concept, each has a slightly different image of who God is and how he interacts with his creation. We give God a gender and a place in our family. We give him human attributes and call him by countless names. A problem arises when we try to realize who God is and experience him directly. We might say we have a strong belief in God, but is our belief based upon a concept or a thought that we are very attached to? Sometimes our beliefs have no basis in reality. Our romantic notions of God probably don’t help us very much. The saints say it is impossible to contact God directly.

This leads us to the second line, “true is his Name”, a very interesting statement. What is Guru Nanak trying to tell us? He is certainly not referring to God’s spoken name. His spoken names are countless. While spoken names might inspire devotion in us, no spoken name could be God’s true Name. To be true, a name would have to be time-less and changeless. It would have to be unborn and deathless. Only

God himself has these attributes. This indicates that the Name is an expression of God himself. The Name is, in fact, none other than God. The saints teach us that, although God cannot be realized directly, his Name can be realized. To realize his Name is to realize God.

As Sant Namdev has so eloquently expressed:

> The Lord’s Name is his form, his form is his Name – His Name is not apart from his form.
> The formless One has taken the form of the Name And within Namdev he has made his abode.
> <sub>_Saint Namdev_</sub>

The saints have written volumes extolling the glory of the Name.

So many saints have spent their lives tirelessly working trying to encourage us to take advantage of this great gift they have given us.

This brings us to the last line: “He is realized through the Guru’s grace.” This is such a beautiful and meaningful statement. It goes directly to the heart of our quest. Having been given the treasure of initiation by the Satguru, the Name is realized through his grace.

Satguru’s grace is given through the process of meditation. How does this happen?

When we first see the Guru, we might have a feeling of warmth and friendship, or awe and mystery. When we recall his image, there are feelings and emotions that are attached to that image. If the Guru should give us the gift of darshan, we might have a glimpse of his divinity and love and have a deeper recognition of his Name. Now, when we recall the Guru’s form in dhyan during meditation, that same feeling arises with the form. For us, this is now the Guru’s Name. Contemplating on his form and Name deepens our concentration. It holds our attention. As we progress, the Guru will give us the vision of his Radiant Form and the accompanying Name. The Name at this level brings bliss and unwavering devotion and concentration.

All along the way, it is our practice to focus on the Guru’s Name and form. Though the Guru’s physical form may grow old and leave us, his Name, his essence, is true and timeless. Repetition of the names given to us by the Guru, over time, brings the recognition of the true Name by the grace of the Guru. Our meditation, which consists of our bhajan and simran, will accomplish this.

Guru Nanak says:

> Meditate on the true Name And reflect on his greatness.
> <sub>_Jap Ji: A Perspective_</sub>

The Guru is our only salvation. Let us keep him in our mind throughout the day and “reflect on his greatness”. Let his presence be always felt. Let us always keep his Name in our hearts. There is no other way. Contemplation of the Guru will save us from the suffering of rebirth and bring us the bliss of his Name.

Sometimes we may not appreciate the great gift we have been given, but with practice we may obtain the treasure within and awaken to realize that the Guru is true. He is real and it is only by his grace that the Lord will be realized.

All he asks is that we adhere to the principles and give full time to our meditation. So little to ask, so much to gain. The treasure is ours. All we have to do is receive it. The Guru’s grace is raining down upon our heads. Let us have confidence that it is always there. Let us turn our attention toward it.

## Love

> Loving everybody means loving the One who is in everybody, but not being attached to any particular person. And we can only love that One after we have merged our identity into his. Through meditation, by his grace, we become perfect and pure so that we can merge into the perfect and pure One....
> If love is there, it is there. If it comes, it just comes. But by meditation everybody can grow that love.... Everybody can grow that feeling, that love, that intensity, by meditation.
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

> Whoever is initiated by a Master comes under his complete protection. Gradually, the idea takes root in the mind of such a disciple that God pervades everything and there exists nothing without him.
> <sub>J. R. Puri and K. S. Khak, _Sultan Bahu_</sub>

## One Plus One Equals One

One plus one does not equal one; everybody knows that. We have known that since kindergarten arithmetic class. If we take one rock and add another rock, we have two rocks. If we invite one person to our house and then invite another person, we have two guests.

If those two people fall in love, they might marry and say, “Now we are one.” Marriage sanctifies that relationship. Still, even in a loving marriage, people remain as individuals. Psychology tells us that marriage is always a balance of relatedness and autonomy. That is, individuals relate and come to unity of purpose, but they also retain personal characteristics. Their bodily instincts, their hearts’ emotions and their brains’ thoughts are different. Hopefully, each person grows to love his or her spouse more deeply in spite of personality differences. Ideally, with enough mutual love and understanding, those differences may even become amusing. Still, some autonomy remains for each person.

No such process exists in the relationship between Master and disciple. All arithmetic is out the window. All psychology is also out the window. The relationship is spiritual and thus is separate from the body, including the heart and the brain. Therefore, the bodies of the Master and disciple, with their separate instincts, thoughts and emotions, do not affect their spiritual relationship. For instance, the Master does not care if a disciple is physically distant or nearby. He cares that a disciple attends to his spiritual meditation. A disciple might attain complete unity with the Master without ever seeing him physically.

Every minute we remember our Master, we are struggling to pay attention to that level of consciousness where one plus one equals one. We are struggling to detach our attention from the world of duality where there are inescapable differences, where one plus one equals two. By following the vows and learning how to deepen our meditation, we approach true unity for all time.

The process of divine realization is relentless. Every time we replace a thought with a round of simran, and every time we seek the Master within, we attune ourselves to the Shabd. Through that process, we come to see the beautiful essence of all life, where one plus one always equals one.

> The present moment is the most valuable thing there is. Nothing happens tomorrow, nothing happens yesterday, everything always happens now. In fact, the ‘now’ is the only time there is. It is impossible for us to do or to think something outside the present moment. When we remember, it is always in the now. When we think about the future, it is always in the now. When the future catches up, it is always in the present moment.
> <sub><sub>_Living Meditation_</sub></sub>

## A Divine Invitation

Hakim Sanai, an early Sufi poet, says:

> Whoever is caught up in the bonds of this world stands only to gain if he flees its might; for this world is the source of pain and sorrow: the wise have called it a transit camp.... It is surely the height of folly for you to linger on this bridge.
> <sub>_The Walled Garden Of Truth – Hakim Sanai,_translated by D. L. Pendlebury</sub>

This is a very good description of the situation of satsangis and seekers alike: we are on a “bridge” between two worlds. Through the grace of the Lord we have, in spirit at least, left the material world. Sometimes we are confused and bewildered, many times we only see obstacles, but our heart wants more than anything to move forward. We are tired of our part in this play and want to go home. The Lord is moved by our plight and our real longing, and sends the Master, the Satguru, with his divine invitation to come back to his court.

Hafiz says:

> You have been invited to meet The Friend.
> No one can resist a Divine Invitation. That narrows down all our choices To just two:
> We can come to God
> Dressed for Dancing, Or
> Be carried on a stretcher To God’s Ward.
> <sub><sub>_I Heard God Laughing: Renderings of Hafiz,_Daniel Ladinsky</sub></sub>

You see, when the Master asks us to come to his court, we cannot refuse – we must go. Maharaj Charan Singh used to jokingly say something similar. To paraphrase: When God calls, you can go willingly or be dragged by a bulldozer.

The point the saints are making here is that we only get that invitation when God wants us back, which means that in our soul we are ready to go back whether we think so or not. Think about all the satsangs that the Master has given, think about all the poetry and _bachans_ (teachings) of the saints – aren’t they always just an invitation for us to leave this place and return home? Isn’t that the most singular message of the saints? So once we receive that invitation, isn’t it the height of folly to linger here?

Rumi almost commands us to leave here, to move on:

> Lovers of truth – rise up! Let us go toward heaven.
> We have seen enough of this world, It’s time to see another....
> <sub>_Rumi – In the Arms of the Beloved, translated by Jonathon Star_</sub>

Soami Ji Maharaj, in a similar way, also exhorts us to leave here:

> My mind, abandon this abode of pleasure and pain, rise above it and attach yourself to Satnam, the true Lord.
> <sub><sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub></sub>

He goes on to explain to us why we should abandon this place and tells us of one of the great obstacles in our way. He says:

> Your stay in this body is short-lived, it is a city you will have to abandon one day. Neither your wealth, nor your wife, nor your children and grandchildren will be of help to you then.

How easy it is to forget that we too must die. We see or hear about death all around us, but we don’t want to believe that it will happen to us. The obstacle that he is referring to is our attachment to the people and things of this world.

In another poem Soami Ji refers to the attachment to wife, children, grandchildren and our own bodies as a four-stranded cord that can expand into five, six, seven, or more strands that tether us to a stake.

He is not saying that we should not love our wife, children, grand-children, etc.; love is very different from attachment. Love, as saints define it, is giving compassion and understanding, without expectations of anything in return. Attachment is always taking or having expectations. The saints say that to put our faith in a relationship built on attachment is foolish. These relationships are only for a short time; they will not last, and when we die none will go with us. Maharaj Sawan Singh, the Great Master, says the following about attachments:

January 2011 25

> Do not give to the world and the people of the world a value equal to that of your own ideal. Wherever your desire is, there must your residence be. Because our love is all for this world, that is the very reason why we must come back into this world again and again. But if we give our love to the Lord, we attain salvation. The Lord and the world are in the scales, and that side to which you give your love will go down (outweigh the other). The world is to be dissolved and her people also. When the gurmukh detaches his love from this world and its people, and has taken the path from the Master, he should give his love to the Lord. If we give to him our true love, then no one can ever bring us back into this world.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

Besides attachment to family, another cord of attachment that tethers us to this world is the attachment to our own body and personality. Now we are so attached to the body that we have forgotten all about death. If we really did understand that we are drowning in the ocean of this world, and if we realized it is the Master that throws us a lifeline, then truly we would hang on to it for dear life. The Master has thrown us a lifeline, which is the path of Sant Mat. This lifeline is the rope of Shabd, which comes from its source in the Lord through the hands of the Master. When we grasp on to this lifeline, slowly but surely the Master pulls us out of the current of this world back to his arms.

Our problem is that we don’t believe that we are drowning, so we can hardly realize that someone is saving us. One reason for this is the fact that we believe we have the luxury of time. So the saints are constantly trying to shake us out of this lethargy and urging us to take action now. Maharaj Charan Singh interprets John 4:35 in the Bible by saying:

> When you have raised your consciousness to the eye centre, you have, as it were, the crop of your meditation ripe and ready for harvesting, and you can begin to gather it. He [Christ] says: The Lord is always waiting for you there.... waiting to pull you to your own destination, your eternal home of peace and bliss....
> Do not put off your meditation on one excuse or another.... The harvest is ready for you; the Lord is waiting for you there.
> <sub><sub>_Light on Saint John_</sub></sub>

How do we overcome these obstacles that our attachments present? How do we break free from these attachments that hold us so firmly to this earth? The answer of course is to have faith in the Master and our meditation. This is no simple matter, but it is the only remedy.

Ultimately, we must surrender the ego entirely. So don’t hesitate, “don’t linger on this bridge”. Grab hold of the Master; he is patiently waiting. Once again, Soami Ji sums up all of these thoughts and words so beautifully:

> Love your Master as a lover adores his sweetheart.
> Stay in his company with a heart filled with longing and hold on to his feet with all your mind.
> Be open with him – no cunning or deceit – and try to grasp his message.
> <sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub>

## Life Is But a Dream

In meditation, thoughts will always come and flit around in their undisciplined silly ways. As soon as we are aware of our shift in attention, we gently bring it back into focus, back into simran. We all know what it is like to have our attention wander. Between one word of simran and the next, a thought intrudes, or a whole train of thoughts, or a sound causes our attention to leap in its direction. We gently bring our attention back to simran, simran, simran.

There is a childhood song we may remember called, “ Row, Row, Row Your Boat”.

> Row, row, row your boat Gently down the stream,
> Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily, Life is but a dream.

There may have been a lot more wisdom, especially spiritual wisdom, in that song than we ever suspected when we sang it as a kid. It advises us to “row, row, row your boat” – no one else can do it for us. Don’t just sit in the boat and do nothing. Take action, take control and steer, and keep on rowing, keep on going. Keep on repeating those names – simran, simran, simran.

Then the song specifically advises us how to do that: “gently”. That’s the same message Baba Ji gives us when he advises us to just relax and do it. Don’t fight it, do it gently, joyfully, relishing each name.

The song further advises us in which direction we should go: Go down the stream, go with the flow, without resistance. Never try to row up the stream. And when we do this we discover that “life is but a dream.”

So it seems that ever since we were kids, there were hints that this world is only an illusion, only a dream and not real.

> You will get the feeling that you are nothing, when you merge in the love of the Master. You are not mentally nor symbolically to feel that you are nothing, or, “I am nothing,” nor to feel that you are everything. You will just forget what you are. When you absolutely blend yourself into the love of another person, then you forget what you are. Then you know you are nothing. Everything is ‘he’ or ‘she’. Similarly, we have to forget by meditation that we are anything and know that everything is the Master. That will only be, as I have just explained, when we drive our ego out of us by meditation.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _The Master Answers_</sub>

## Mystical Space

There are many ways of looking at the world around us. We all have different perspectives, according to our individual needs, habits, education, culture, social background, temperament, talents, and so on. Essentially, however, as human beings, we are all put together in the same way. At the bodily level, we share the same senses, and so presumably we all perceive things in a similar manner. What gives us a different take on things is our individual minds. Such is human life, and it need not be a problem. Difficulties only arise when we take our perspective to be real, and the perspective of others to be somewhat less than real. But is any of it real anyway, even our own perspective? Does the world itself have any reality?

In modern – as in ancient – times, one of the prevailing world views is that the universe consists of nothing more than material substance, of no more than what we can perceive with our five senses. Good old solid matter. Or is it? Until around one hundred years ago, the idea of the indestructibility of matter held firm. But the advent of physicists like Ernest Rutherford, Niels Bohr and many others brought laboratory proof that far from being solid, matter is mostly comprised of empty space. Further research has led to the realization that the only reason we don’t fall through the floor under the influence of gravity is due to electromagnetic forces between and within atoms.

Encouraged by these discoveries, enthusiastic scientists have subjected atoms and subatomic particles to increasingly higher energies, breaking them into ever smaller fragments, with the net result that after one hundred years of study, they have realized that so-called matter is nothing more than a dance of tiny particles. And if you apply enough energy, you can generally break these particles into even smaller ones. Someone called it the ‘particle zoo’.

The question is, from a mystical as well as a scientific perspective, what are these particles made of? And more than that, what keeps them endlessly zooming about? To cut a long story short, the scientists’ conclusion is that these particles are not little solid blobs of something at all. They are nothing more than vortices or tiny pumps of energy spinning or pumping energy out of pure space. They have properties such as mass and electrical charge, which give us the illusion of something substantial. But actually, they are just patterns or points of energy in space. So the question then becomes, what is space? And the answer seems to be that far from being empty, space itself is pure energy in potential, ready to be whipped up into the particles and atoms that go on to give us the illusion of good old solid matter. Space, by the way, is an aspect of the fifth element – ether, or _akash,_ in Indian terminology.

The physical universe is thus no more than a dance of energy spun out of the space that defines it. It is all a magic show. Mystics have called the world an illusion, _maya_ in Indian terminology, and it seems that the scientists have verified this at a deeply fundamental level. What they have as yet been unable to determine is the source of the energy that keeps it going; for an integral aspect of this energy dance is its motion, which never seems to diminish or stop. Mystics, on the other hand, have no difficulty in identifying the source of energy. The divine source, they say, has created everything by means of a creative power. They have called it sound, word, voice, music and a multitude of other names. It is a dynamic vibration that “rolls and flows through all things”; it is the power of God in creative action. It is also consciousness and intelligence in action – a consciousness and intelligence that is divine.

Scientists have made considerable progress in describing these forces. Intriguingly, they also feel that it should be possible to describe all the fundamental forces of nature in one grand unified theory (GUT), one grand formulation, one “theory of everything”. This in itself is significant, for it seems to indicate that there is an unconscious acknowledgment that all of nature originates from one source. In essence, the problems with the current scientific description of basic matter boil down to trying to reconcile the macroscopic force of gravity, which holds entire galaxies and solar systems together, with the submicroscopic forces of electromagnetism that hold atoms and molecules together. One of the most successful GUTs or unified mathematical descriptions of these forces is known as “string theory”.

String theory says that all subatomic particles consist not of points in space but of vibrations in ultra-tiny one-dimensional energy strings. As theories go, it’s pretty good, but it has one drawback. These strings are so tiny that the theory cannot (so far) be tested in the laboratory. It therefore remains at the level of mathematical speculation, or philosophy in the language of mathematics. It also has various bizarre, allied but essential notions, like the suggestion that space is really ten-dimensional, the extra dimensions being wrapped up so small that we can’t see them (whatever that may mean!). String theory is also responsible for the notion of an infinitude of parallel universes, much beloved of science fiction writers. It has other, more fundamental problems too, like its inability to describe some of the basic properties of matter, such as mass.

So it’s a good idea, but other descriptions of the material universe as originating from the energy of space may yet prove simpler, more testable, and more able to describe the properties of the subatomic world with which physicists are familiar. It may even be possible to extract clean energy from the space around us for human needs. But however the scientists try to describe it, the fundamental problem still remains
– what keeps it all going? Where does the primal energy originate? And where has all the order, organization and seeming intelligence that we observe in the universe come from? Mystics have the answer – the divine Word, the Shabd, the ultra-dynamic, creative and intelligent divine presence within us and in all things.

But for most of us, this – like string theory – remains just a description that appeals to us, a perspective we can relate to. The only way to know for sure what’s going on is to forget all the theories and to sit down in meditation; allow our consciousness to expand and be taken up by the Master, so that we can see for ourselves how the whole show is put together. Then we will see how matter is an expression of consciousness, and how consciousness is the essence of the divine. Out with the theory and in with personal experience.

So it’s back to our pads, guys!

> Through past actions we attain the robe of human form – through grace, the door to liberation.
> <sub>_Jap Ji: A Perspective_</sub>

## Lighten Up

Recently, Baba Ji said several times that we need to lighten up. In that context, he was talking about not taking life too seriously, but instead about finding time to enjoy ourselves and participating in things even when we are not very good at them – things like singing or dancing. “Lighten up” can have other meanings too, so let us look at three additional ways we can lighten our lives.

Having a lighter attitude and being positive on the path is very important, even when things are not going well in our lives. Smiling is important. It is said that it takes something like forty-three muscles to frown but only seventeen to smile; therefore, smiling is physically easier. This may not be literally true, but Maharaj Charan Singh supports this idea when he says:

> Give up the habit of worrying and losing your temper. It is easy to be happy and laughing; in fact, easier than it is to fret and frown. God does not want us to be unhappy. It is a sin to worry. Have faith in his goodness and grace and try to keep simran on your lips at all times.
> <sub><sub>_Divine Light_</sub></sub>

He doesn’t say, “Try not to worry.” He says, “It is a sin to worry.” He says, “God does not want us to be unhappy.” In other words, God wants us to be happy, to laugh. The Masters themselves often show us this light hearted side, where they can joke and laugh easily. Many of us have fond memories of Maharaj Charan Singh throwing back his head with a hearty laugh; or of hearing him say something unexpected and then hearing the audience break out into peals of laughter as a wide grin spread across his face.

In the pictorial album of Hazur’s life, _Legacy of Love,_ we are reminded of his delightful humour:

> His laughter was spontaneous, vibrant, joyful and infectious. He would catch his lower lip in his teeth as though this were the only way he could stop himself laughing too much. Were he himself not to limit it, one felt his merriment might shake the whole world.

In _Heaven on Earth_ we get a glimpse of Maharaj Sawan Singh’s humour:

> His keen sense of humour delighted the sangat, and when he laughed, his eyes, lips, his whole body radiated joy. Who could resist laughing with him?

In the same book, the humour of Maharaj Jagat Singh is revealed in this encounter:

> Once a satsangi said to him, “Maharaj Ji, when I sit for meditation, my soul withdraws to my knees, yet I do not see anything inside.” Sardar Bahadur Ji replied, “Brother, the Lord it seems, has erred a little. He put the eyes too far away, high up in the face. If he had put them in the knees, you would surely have seen something.” Then he affectionately told the man to try to attain more concentration in meditation and come to the eye centre. He further added, “When you come to this point you will hear the sound and also see the light.”

Here the Master was responding to his disciple with love and humour. The questioner was anxious, but by making him laugh, the Master helped him with the problem and also cheered him up. Humour, laughter, and enjoyment are all parts of this path.

The Masters can make us laugh because they are overflowing with love and happiness. The laughter of the Masters springs from an inexhaustible well of happiness and bliss, which, as they repeatedly tell us, is to be found inside every one of us.

Maharaj Charan Singh tells us in _Quest for Light:_

> In fact, no other person should be so happy in this world as an initiate who is on the path. He should always keep his final goal in sight – the treasures, the joys and the bliss that await him in his true home.
> Give up all feeling of depression and live a joyous life, fully relaxed and thanking the Lord for the great gift he has conferred on you. Keep your thoughts in simran and bhajan and see what happiness you will find within yourself. Do not worry about anything in this life, which is all an unpleasant dream. The real life lies beyond, where your Master awaits you.

Keeping an attitude of joy and gratitude while also focusing on our meditation is how we should live our lives. We should enjoy our life – even love it – but without attachment to it. This is the first way that we can lighten up and not take ourselves so seriously.

Another way to lighten up is illustrated in this quotation written above the Victory Gate at Fatehpur Sikri near Agra in India. It says:

> The world is a bridge. Cross it but build no house upon it. The world endures but for an hour. Spend it in devotion.

This world is a bridge; it is a means to the end. It is a step on the way to our true home. Just as we would not build a house in the middle of a bridge, we should not live as though this physical existence is our final destination. Our stay on the bridge of this world will end before long, so we need to use that time to make spiritual progress, not to accumulate possessions and attachments. We need to travel lightly while we are here.

In the Bible, Matthew 6:20-22, Jesus talks about the value of building up spiritual wealth in comparison to the futility of accumulating material wealth. He says:

> Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.
> But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal; for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

The Masters tell us that in order to live a normal life we only really need a roof over our head, a shirt on our back and food in our stomach. Our problem comes from striving to overprovide for our future by gathering wealth and property beyond these practical needs.

Baba Ji once humorously alluded to this, joking about women’s inability to reduce their wardrobes because they justify a need for every last item in it: a white dress for an Indian funeral, a black one for a western funeral, another dress for a family party and so on.

On reflection, we can see that men are certainly the same with their attachments.

Why do we worry about what others will say about us if we don’t wear the latest styles, in the latest colours, with perfect accessories?

Each day we can only wear one outfit. How many clothes do we really need? Maharaj Jagat Singh is reported to have had two handkerchiefs

– one in his pocket, and one in the wash (_Heaven on Earth_).

In _Quest for Light_ Maharaj Charan Singh says:

> You can never get rid of desires by satisfying them. That would be adding fuel to the fire. The more fuel you add, the more the fire blazes. Mind can never be satisfied and will never be satiated. The more you give it, the more it desires. We have to resist and overcome temptations. Simran and bhajan coupled with love for the Master and the Lord are the ways to do that.

Meditation develops love in us for the Lord and the Master, which naturally detaches us from things. Meditation gives us perspective, makes us prioritize our true needs and develops contentment in us. With that contentment, we no longer strive to change our circumstances or to fill our lives with nonspiritual things. It allows us to travel lightly in this world; it allows us to lighten up.

Meditation affords us a third meaning of the expression to lighten up. When we meet the Master we come in touch with the inner light. Christ says, “As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world” (Bible, John 9:5). These words are usually quoted to explain that only a living Master, not a dead one, can help us to return home to the Lord. Only someone to whom we can talk and ask questions can explain the teachings of past mystics. Only a living Master can initiate us during this human birth. But it also has another meaning: the Master is literally light.

When we meditate, when we withdraw our attention from the world to the eye centre, we meet the Radiant Form of our Master. Christ further says, “The light of the body is the eye: if, therefore, thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light” (Bible, Matthew 6:22).

In _Light on Saint Matthew_ Maharaj Charan Singh explains what Christ means:

> So Christ says that if you want to be one with the light, the light is in the body. And if you want to see that light in this body, the temple of the living God, open your single eye. Be here at the eye centre. Close these two eyes, detach yourself from the whole world and open the inner eye, the third eye. Draw the attention back to the eye centre. Focus it there. Open this door. Then you will see the light. There is nothing but light in your body.

So ‘lighten up’ can also mean to merge ourselves in that inner light and be filled with it.

This path is all about light. Just think of the names of some of our books: _Light on Sant Mat, Light on Saint Matthew, Light on Saint John, Dawn of Light_ and _Divine Light._

At initiation, we were given the passport, the visa and the ticket, but now we have to get on that plane. The Master is the pilot; he knows where to go – towards the light. All we have to do is to sit down and keep his company while he takes us there. If we love someone, how can we not pay attention to him and follow him to the destination he has chosen? This is a path of bhakti, of devotion, of love. If we love him, we want to go to where he is and where he is going. We want to lighten up our lives, because that is what he wants for us too, to lighten up our attitudes, to lighten our physical lives, to become enlightened, to become full of light.

Sultan Bahu says:
> In the dark, fathomless night of ignorance, love is a torch that brings light.
> From it emanates a Melody that enraptures lovers’ hearts!
> <sub>_Sultan Bahu_</sub>

That love, that light, that melody is the Shabd; let us go within, merge with it and become light ourselves.

> The inner light one can see even in darkness, and even a blind man can experience it, because it is not the physical eyes but the attention that sees within.
> <sub><sub>_Divine Light_</sub></sub>

## The Time Is Now

> Faced with the sighs of lovers, even the mountains crumble to earth.
> Faced with the sighs of lovers, even deadly snakes flee to their holes.
> The sighs of lovers cause the stars to tumble from the heavens above. Faced with the sighs of lovers, only the lovers remain steadfast.

> Give up all procrastination and awaken your soul...
> Have faith in the Lord, like the birds that fly through the air without carrying their food....

> Bliss and grace reign in the heart that glows with the light of love.
> <sub>_Sultan Bahu_</sub>

## How Much Is Enough?

The Masters have used the analogy of a prison in describing our state in this world. We find ourselves very much here – in this physical state, in this prison – and subject to the pulls on our attention that keep us bound to this body, this identity, this world. That is, we continue to choose those things and do those things that keep us imprisoned and away from God.

The saints tell the story of four philanthropists, and how one philanthropist in trying to improve the condition of the prisoners, brings food and secures clean drinking water for them. Another philanthropist provides clothing and blankets, so that they’re not exposed to the elements. A third philanthropist arranges for the education of the prisoners, so that they can better care for themselves. But in all these cases, the prisoners are still prisoners. Is not the fourth philanthropist, who brings the key to release them from the prison, the one who provides the greatest and longest lasting service? This is the job and the role and the service of perfect living Masters. They come from the Father to wake us up and then to liberate us. They say yes, you can get out of this prison.

This path requires the total transformation of the disciple. And what are we transformed into? We don’t really have a clue – and that’s frightening; it’s like jumping off into the great dark unknown. But we have to be prepared to be more than we think we are. We have to be prepared to drop and leave behind those mental constructs, those habits and behaviour patterns that impede whatever it is the Master wants us to be. We have to be prepared to let go of all the nuances of self-identification in our meditation. We have to be prepared to become him, to be light, to fly. All our efforts make us more malleable in the hands of the Master, and the more malleable we are, the more capable we are of being transformed into that which the Lord desires. We – at this level of consciousness – don’t really know what we will become. Does the caterpillar know when it spins a cocoon that it will become a beautiful butterfly, not to mention a butterfly with a particular pattern and set of colours on its wings?

Does the caterpillar consciously know what to design? It’s doubtful. A higher consciousness knows it will become a butterfly, but the caterpillar doesn’t know ahead of time what it will become. It knows instinctively it should make certain preparations, certain efforts, such as spinning a cocoon. In fact, if it does not take those actions, it will not become a butterfly.

So, by the Master’s transformative process, we will escape the prison of this body and the physical world, as well as the prison of the emotional and mental worlds. Our lifeline in this process is the Master, who is one with the Shabd or Nam. We need to trust him, we need to hold on to him with love in our hearts, and eventually we need to surrender to him.

You know how we all love to see the Master, be near to him, sit in the front row? What if the Master told us that we were the first in line to go home? First in line! What if he said that to us? It would make us feel wanted and motivated to get out, break out of our prison cell. But the fact is that he really is saying that to each one of us. We are first in line, each one of us. It’s not as if he is attending to someone else better or first, and then he will attend to us, that we are second class citizens. No, he is inviting each one of us to walk out of this prison house, this imprisoning self we are captivated by.

He is the fourth philanthropist with the key to the prison door. He opened the door to our cell when he connected us to the sound and light within, the Shabd, the Nam, at the time of initiation. The door is open. It is for us to find that door and walk out. He has given us the directions to the door and given us instructions on how to walk out. We are to raise and concentrate our attention at the door, the eye centre, through simran and contemplation on his form; then we will merge into his Radiant Form within, which resonates with sound and light, and follow that inner sound back to the Father. We have just to walk through that door and attach ourselves to him. He will take care of the rest.

The Lord has seen to it that each of us has enough to eat – maybe not every sensory explosion we desire but enough to sustain us. Also, every one of us has enough clothes to wear; we are not walking around naked. And he has seen to it that we have a roof over our head and a blanket for our bed. We have all been given circumstances where we have the basic necessities of life. Our only real task is to walk through that open door.

But we have become accustomed to life within the prison and especially within our own cell. We are like flies in a glass jar. Scientists have done experiments raising flies in a jar where they eat, sleep, procreate, and carry on with whatever life it is that flies have. But the scientists have found that if they take the lid off the jar, the flies just keep carrying on; they do not fly out. They have become accustomed to life within the jar, all their needs are being met in the jar. Their attachments are there. Perhaps they are afraid to fly out, or perhaps they just don’t notice that the lid is open. But they do not come out.

Our lot is somewhat the same. We have become accustomed to life in the physical body, to life in this creation. The prison door has been opened, but we just carry on as before. And this is all the more pitiable because humans have discrimination, can make decisions and have the capability of exerting willpower or effort.

We are attached to faces and places, to situations of power, to the beauty of the physical creation, to the rush of physical sensations and to a sense of security through the acquisition of physical things and money. Generally, that is, we have become accustomed to life the way we have known it these many eons inside the glass jar. The lid is off, the prison door is open, but we are perhaps afraid, perhaps despairing, perhaps not even noticing.

We just have to do our meditation and, as Baba Ji advises, let go in our mind of all those associations and recurring thoughts; let go of our causes and concerns; let go of our attachment to how we think life ought to be. If we are not holding on to all these worldly thoughts and desires, we will be able to walk out that door to freedom. Baba Ji once said something like: It’s all self-imposed limitations you can do it!

You know, when we play a game, we all want our turn – our turn to hit the ball, our turn to catch the ball, our turn to jump the rope and our turn to deal the deck of cards. Perhaps we wait a long time for our turn, but we want to be recognized as an equal participant in the game. So we are very careful to make sure we get our turn.

But when is it God’s turn? When is it God’s inning? What are our priorities? How are we spending our time? How much is enough in this life within the glass jar? How much money do we really need? Yes, we need some money to maintain a stable life. But how much money is enough? We need food to sustain ourselves, but how much food is enough? We need to use our mind constructively and be properly educated, but again how much is enough? We need to be of service to others, but if it occupies all our attention, how much is enough? We were supposedly sent to this creation for experience, but how much experience is enough? Isn’t it time to look beyond the glass jar? Isn’t it time to grow beyond this fly mentality? The Master is telling us that this is our time, this is our turn to move beyond the constraints of life on this physical plane. He wouldn’t have initiated us if it was not possible to walk out that door. What are we waiting for? More experience? It’s time for a prison break.

Maulana Rum is quoted in _The Path:_

> This world is a vast prison and we are all prisoners in it; make a hole and escape.

The Master has given us the mental equipment with which to break out of this prison. We have just to do our meditation and let go of life in the glass jar, let go of the self that separates us from the one we love.

Maharaj Charan Singh was asked whether the time was destined when desires and attachments would leave us. He says that it will change from those desires:

> By giving time to meditation, by colouring our mind in Shabd and Nam, dying our mind in Shabd and Nam, by changing the tendency of the mind inward and upward.
> <sub><sub>March 10, 1988</sub></sub>

So there we have it. He asks us to train our mind to detach from the desires we encounter in life. He says a lot depends on us, that we have to turn the tendency of the mind from looking outward and all the activity we encounter there to looking inward and upward, and that we do that in our meditation, where we dye the mind in Shabd. He is saying we must take some actions in the transformation that is required. We must spin a cocoon, which shuts us off from the world and turns us inward, in order to be transformed into the butterfly that can fly in the light.

Maharaj Charan Singh says:

> When the wrappings are being removed, you first see that light and all those things inside your own self, and you know that the wrappings are being removed. Then you become nobler, more loving, and more and more devotion for the Father comes in you. When the clouds start disappearing, then the light of the sun starts shining. You always know when the clouds disperse and light comes. Similarly, you also know about yourself. When the mind becomes better or purer or nobler, that light penetrates you and your whole attitude in life changes, your characteristics and approach to life change.
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

That is the beginning of the great transformation that we undergo as disciples. We have only to take those actions to change the tendency of mind from outward to inward, to do our meditation, and “Let go.” We will walk out of that prison door and find our Master. We have only to maintain our focus solely on the Shabd with which he resonates. As Maharaj Sawan Singh writes in _Spiritual Gems:_

> If a soul were to stick to the current, and not look aside or go off the current, and were to leave behind the memory of this world, there is no power that can keep it here for a second, or that can stop it on the way.

## Book Review

**Signs of the Unseen: The Discourses of Jalaluddin Rumi**

Translated by W. M. Thackston, Jr.

Publisher: Brattleboro, VT: Threshold Books, 1994. ISBN: 1570625328

It is not often that we have a chance to “eavesdrop” on informal talks between disciples and their Master. _Signs of the Unseen_ is Persian scholar

W. M. Thackston’s translation of Rumi’s _Fihi ma fihi_, which literally means “in it is what is in it.” This title has also been translated as “table talk,” a phrase that perfectly describes these free-ranging conversations and talks held by Rumi with his followers.

Reading _Signs of the Unseen,_ we can easily imagine Rumi sitting among his disciples and fielding all sorts of questions – some relevant and others not so relevant but all answered in a spirit of loving kindness. The topics in the _Discourses_ range from Sufi states of consciousness, to admonitions to remember the objective of our lives, to why are the Turks bothering everyone so much? Some of the questions and responses concern orthodox aspects of Islam; others parse fine points of philosophy, often with a healthy dose of paradox. But even when Rumi’s discourses are long and technical, he always weaves in pithy stories. In the midst of one such discourse, he relates,
> A king once said to a dervish, “When you enjoy glory and proximity at God’s court, make mention of me.” “When I am in that Presence,” said the dervish, “and am exposed to the radiance of that Sun of that Beauty, I am unable to make mention of myself, much less of you!”

Rumi uses poetic, powerful images. For example, while emphasizing the importance of gratitude, he says, “Gratitude is to suckle at the breast of good things. Even when the breast is full, its milk will not flow unless you suck.”

He often inserts into his discourse an anecdote which is capable of many interpretations, leaving the reader to ponder. In the middle of an extended analogy, where he says that the planting of a seed is a “question” and the tree that grows is the “answer,” Rumi tells a story:

> A king read three petitions from a subject but wrote no answer. The subject wrote a complaint, saying “I have petitioned thrice. If my petition is acceptable, please say so. If not, please say so.” On the back of the petition the king wrote, “Have you not realized that no answer is an answer?”

He goes on to claim that all of a man’s actions are “questions.” Weaving in quotations from the _Qur`an_, Rumi explains that man complains about the “answers”:

> Every move man makes is a question, and everything that happens to him – grief and joy – is an answer.… If the answer is unpleasant, one must quickly ask forgiveness and not ask such a question again. Yet when the affliction which We sent came upon them, they did not humble themselves, but their hearts became hardened [6:43]
> – that is, they did not understand that the answer was in accord with their question. And Satan prepared for them that which they had committed [6:43] – that is, they saw the answer to their own question and said, “This ugly answer is not appropriate to that question.”

Rumi’s _Discourses_ are sometimes startling, disturbing to our preconceptions. For example:

> We said, “Some with a desire to see you kept saying, ‘I wish I could have seen the Master’.” That person will not see the Master in reality just now, because the desire he has to see the Master is itself a veil over the Master. At this time he will not see the Master without a veil.

Rumi goes on to explain, “All desires, affections, loves, and fondnesses
… are all ‘veils.’” He gives the analogy that when winter comes, people bundle up and stay inside. Plants also curl up, and animals take to hiding in the earth. But when spring unfolds, all their problems “are answered at one blow. The secondary causes disappear. Everything sticks its head out and knows what has caused that calamity.” Similarly, “When one passes beyond this world and sees that King without these ‘veils,’ then one will realize that all those things were ‘veils’ and ‘coverings’ and that what they were seeking was in reality that one thing.”

Rumi tells the story of one sheikh who was in a state of complete absorption in God. He was so lost in his love that he did not heed the Muslim call to prayer. The sheikh’s disciples turned toward Mecca in obedience to the call to prayer, except two who remained facing their master. It was revealed to another disciple that the disciples who were praying had their backs toward Mecca while the two disciples facing the sheikh had their faces toward it.

> Since the master had passed beyond the state of ego-consciousness and become lost to himself, consumed in the light of God, as is the meaning of the prophetic saying, `Die before you die’ – he had then become the Light of God, and whoever turns his back on the Light of God to face a wall has assuredly turned his back on the kiblah [the direction of Mecca].

In commenting on the _Qur’anic_ verse, “Whithersoever ye turn, there is the face of God,” Rumi says: “That Face is ever current, uninterrupted, and abiding, never ceasing. True lovers sacrifice themselves to this Face and seek nothing in return. The rest are like cattle.”

Rumi exhorts us,
> With God there is no room for two egos. You say “I,” and He says “I.” In order for this duality to disappear, either you must die for Him or He for you. It is not possible for Him to die.… He is so gracious, however, that if it were possible He would die for you in order that the duality might disappear.…

We are sent into this human life for this one specific purpose, to become a true lover, sacrificing oneself for love. “If you neglect to accomplish the task for which you were sent, it is as though you did nothing.” One day of human life “is worth more than the life of the whole world from beginning to end.” Using this human life for other purposes is like using a golden bowl to cook turnips. “One fraction of that bowl could buy one hundred pots.”

> Day and night you cater to your body. Now this body is your steed, and the world is its stable. A horse’s food is not fit for its rider.… Since you have been overwhelmed by your bestial and animal nature, you have remained in the stable with the horses and have no place among the ranks of the kings and princes of the world where your heart is.

He counsels his disciples to make all the effort they are capable of, and only when they have expended all, when they collapse helpless and exhausted, will God’s grace carry them forward.

> We say to you, “Travel this endless road on your own weak legs.” We know that with your weak legs you will never be able to finish the way – in a hundred thousand years you will not finish even one stage of the way. Only when you make the effort and come onto the road to fall down at last, unable to go another step, only then will you be uplifted by God’s favor.

Another excellent translation of Rumi’s _Fihi ma fihi_ is also available under the title _Discourses of Rumi,_ translated by A. J. Arberry (Samuel Weiser, 2001, reprint of the 1961 original).

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## O Mind, Why Be Proud?

> One day this body will mingle with dust and you will be cast back into the cycle of birth and death.
> Cultivate humility and meekness in your heart and save yourself from lust and anger.
> Love the Master, put your faith in him and absorb the nectar of Nam within yourself.
> Don’t do what your evil mind suggests, but keep the Master’s teachings in your heart.
> This willful mind won’t surrender, for it thrives on greed and self-indulgence. Pay no attention to what your mind says, or your association with it will be your downfall in the world.
> Understand the nature of this fool, then capture it, and never abandon the shelter of the Master’s feet.
> Secure the Master’s form in your eyes and ascend to the inner sky through the practice of Surat Shabd.
> <sub>Soami Ji Maharaj, _Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub>

<sub>February 2011 3</sub>

## Making Progress

Human beings are infatuated with progress. In every field of action, people calculate. They evaluate and analyze their growth and development to see where they stand; to decide whether their effort towards a particular endeavour is paying off. It is a method people use to determine success or failure. If a person is making progress, he is labelled a success; if he is not, he is deemed a failure. It is a typical approach associated with worldly matters.

The problem arises when this mindset is applied to the spiritual life. When a disciple’s motivation on the spiritual path is to make progress, he starts off on the wrong foot and carries with him the burden of expectation. He expects progress to come in the form of inner experiences and if, after a while, nothing happens then the disciple feels disheartened. He concludes that he is a failure and assumes that the meditation is not working.

But the Sant Mat Masters lovingly explain that first and foremost there is more to spiritual progress than experiencing the Light and Sound. On the spiritual path, progress comes in the form of a deep and profound process called ‘realization’. And it is called a process because it represents a series of subtle yet definite changes that the disciple undergoes throughout the spiritual journey.

It begins with all the little realizations that a disciple experiences: like when one learns that getting angry does more damage to himself than to anybody else, one therefore makes a genuine effort to control his anger; or when one understands that honesty is not just about telling the truth, but also about being true to oneself; or when one realizes that words have an immense power to hurt people and consequently has learned not to react when situations arise.

All these valuable lessons are a result of an increased awareness that is a very real part of one’s spiritual progress. And as this awareness grows, the disciple starts to feel, appreciate and respect the presence of the Divine in everything he does. He becomes a better person and a more humane being until, eventually, he reaches the pinnacle of all realizations: when the soul, having shed all its covers, realizes its true spiritual nature and joyfully exclaims, “That am I”. And it finally sees that the soul and the Lord are of the same essence; that one is the drop and the other is the ocean, and that both were in each other all along.

Advancing on the spiritual path is not the same as making progress in the material world. In Sant Mat, there are no calculations. There is no judgment and there are no such things as success and failure. The mystics remind us that in the court of the Lord, there is only one unit of measure and it is called ‘love’.

> At satsang one day, the Great Master made the statement that going inside and advancing to higher regions depended more on love than upon anything else. A satsangi asked, “Can that love be developed in every disciple?” The Master’s reply was very significant and should be remembered. He said, “No, that love is a gift of the Master.” Then the satsangi asked, “Will the disciple always get it?” The Master said, “Why not, if he works for it?
> Everyone else pays wages earned, and so if anyone works for the Master, he must draw the wages due him.”
> <sub>_With the Great Master in India_</sub>

Every disciple on the spiritual path is 100 percent dependent on the benevolence of the omnipotent Lord. Only His compassion and mercy can liberate the soul from the huge debt of karma that keeps it imprisoned in this creation. So, in matters of the spirit, it is not about making progress, it is about invoking His grace. It is about sitting in His presence every single day during meditation and begging for forgiveness. It is about obedience, submission and the helpless desire to please the Beloved for the sake of love and love alone.

And if the disciple does nothing else during his entire life but take this one small, faithful step, then he never ever has to worry. Because for such a devotee, the Supreme Father will take a hundred thousand steps and will Himself descend from the highest region of universal spirit and carry His precious child back home.

> Go on in all simplicity; do not be anxious to win a quiet mind, and it will be all the quieter.
> Do not examine so closely into the progress of your soul.
> Do not crave so much to be perfect, but let your spiritual life be formed by your duties, and by the actions which are called forth by circumstances.
> Do not take overmuch thought for tomorrow.
> God, who has led you safely on so far, will lead you on to the end.
> <sub>Saint Francis de Sales,</sub>
> <sub>A _Selection from the Spiritual Letters of Saint Francis de Sales_</sub>

## Something to Think About

Ceaseless effort to make our life pure and truthful is true prayer. This draws to us the mercy of the Lord, and His grace and limitless blessings then fulfil the sincere and pure desires of our heart. By merely asking of the Lord or the Master that we may love Him, we do not, as a matter of fact, begin to love Him. But if we consciously pray for a truthful and pure life and try to elevate our life, we will then be moulded as He wills and will begin to realize His presence and to share His love.

<sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol 3_</sub>

> ---

Attitude is more important than circumstances, failures or successes; than money or poverty, illness or health. If we have a positive attitude, we will make the best out of even the worst conditions. If we have a negative attitude, we will be miserable even in the best of circumstances.

<sub><sub>_A Spiritual Primer_</sub></sub>

> ---

If we always feel perturbed with every little thing, then how can we concentrate, how can we meditate? If we make every little thing an issue the size of the Himalayas, then how can we concentrate? We have to forget; we have to forgive; we have to train our mind to take things easily, lightly, to laugh them away, ignore them. This is all training the mind.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Die to Live_</sub>

## Human Being

> You are a human being. What does that mean? Mastery of life is not a question of control, but of finding a balance between human and Being. Mother, father, husband, wife, young, old, the roles you play, the functions you fulfil, whatever you do – all that belongs to the human dimension. It has its place and needs to be honoured, but in itself it is not enough for a fulfilled relationship or life. Human alone is never enough, no matter how hard you try or what you achieve. Then there is Being. It is found in the still, alert presence of consciousness itself, the consciousness that you are. Human is form. Being is formless. Human and Being are not separate but interwoven.
> <sub>Eckhart Tolle, _A New Earth_</sub>

**Human Alone Is Not Enough**
We have a body, two arms, and we walk on two legs. We go to work, care for our families, and appreciate the taste of fine dining and entertainment. Our brains have produced the brightest of talents, propelling us into unimaginable realms of science and technology. Within us lies the ability to discriminate. We are humans – clearly, the top of this creation.

While on the surface we collectively present ourselves as a species that functions while maintaining a sense of order, internally we seem to be in a constant state of conflict and chaos. Deriving our ever changing identities from all our role-playing and responsibilities, we barely even remember what, if any, is the purpose behind it all.

When we analyze the situation, we find that over time, the dependency on the need to be rewarded has grown significantly in everything that we do. As a result, we begin to rely on external gratification and stimulants – such as mid-day cappuccino time-outs, weekend getaways, or even late-night television – as temporary escapes instead of savouring them for what they are in the moment. At work, we are preoccupied by thoughts of the badly needed break, and while on our break, our attention is on the office … dreading going back.

We have all heard teachers’ remarks such as: “He has the potential, but his heart just isn’t in it,” or “He lacks the enthusiasm.” The same possibly applies to us now, only it isn’t school anymore; it’s the rest of our lives. This is what it means to be _only_ human – living, but with a lacklustre attitude to life.

**Being – Our God Identity**
God, or any other name that we give to the Creator, at present is merely an ambiguous character or phenomenon that we have constructed in our minds as a result of all the years of reading and accumulating of information and concepts. How then, if it is even possible, is one to validate the existence of this invisible force?

Mystics have explained that the divine spark of the Lord is in every one of us. In fact, it is who we really are – the soul, our true being.

We are not conscious of this due to the fidgety nature and scattered attention of our mind. ‘Being’ is our formless identity and cannot be found using tools of science.

A hint of evidence of this marvel, however, can be observed in more familiar and less philosophical examples such as athletes and artists.

A tennis player is able to maintain incredible speed and accuracy in serving and timing the ball, so that it repeatedly hits its mark cross-court, while also engaging in strategy and swift footwork. Similarly, how great composers create masterpieces out of nothing. Scientists have termed this state of awareness in which these gifted persons perform as being ‘in the zone’. It is a heightened state of alertness where dissipated attention is collected and then channelized into action. However, this is only a temporary state for an interval of time, after which the attention once again spreads itself out.

Saints, on the other hand, live their entire lives in the zone. They think and act in this state of higher consciousness having realized the Being within. Not only do they operate in this mode of bliss, but they also invite and teach us how to do the same through meditation.

**Human Being – Becoming Perfect**
It is through spiritual practice that one is able to connect and align with Being. Meditation teaches surrender, and surrender leads to acceptance. Acceptance finally eradicates personal will, thus allowing us to align with our God-identity within.

The human then evolves to the pinnacle of the species to become perfect – a true human being, hence fulfilling the purpose of this human birth. Charged with an inexhaustible supply of divine energy, one then lives carrying out day-to-day activities with a renewed passion and enthusiasm for life.

And at death, it is only the body that dies. For those who die as merely human, the body perishes as another awaits somewhere in ‘the cycle of eighty-four’. For the awakened ones who die as human beings, the soul merges back into universal consciousness, forever ending the cycle of birth and death.

## Love Transcends All Pain

One day, when Bayazid of Bistam was walking along the market place of Baghdad, he saw a criminal being whipped by the authorities for a crime he had committed. His back was scarred and he was bleeding excessively as a result. However, what surprised Bayazid was the expression on this criminal’s face. There was no fear, no pain; instead he had a smile and his eyes were shining. After his punishment was over, and once the crowd had dispersed, Bayazid took care of the man and covered his wounds.

Bayazid then asked the man, “I watched you – you were not even aware of the pain you were going through. Tell me, what is your secret that you did not even shed a tear during this most painful ordeal?”

The man replied, “I am in love with a beautiful woman. Over the past year, I have tried to win her love but not once did she look my way. Today, as I was being whipped, I saw my beloved. Seeing my state, she had tears in her eyes! For those tears, I would undergo the same punishment a hundred times over.”

Bayazid told his disciples, “This is the way that we must love God. If our attention is focused on our Beloved, then we can surpass any worldly suffering.”

> Love sweetens pains; and when one loves God, one suffers for His sake with joy and courage.
> <sub>Brother Lawrence, _The Practice of the Presence of God_</sub>

## Fearless

Have you ever seen a toddler learning how to walk? As long as his attention is focused on his father, he is relaxed and in perfect balance. But as soon as he looks down at his wobbly legs, he loses his footing and falls.

Likewise, we are spiritual babies, learning to walk on the path of Sant Mat. As long as we keep our focus on the Master, we find that we are in complete balance, oblivious to the happenings around us. But the moment we turn away from Him, and look down at our wobbly and sorry state, we are overcome with fear and fall to pieces.

How often have we questioned the Lord about why, at our lowest moment, He seems to have forsaken us. He lovingly explains that He is always there with us. If we cannot see Him or feel His presence, it is our own lacking and failing. His grace is ever flowing, like a bountiful spring of water offering a cool drink to the thirsty soul. But if our hearts are not receptive, our thirst can never be quenched. As Maharaj Charan Singh explained to a disciple:

> Master is looking at every single one of us on the inside all the time.
> <sub><sub>_Thus Saith the Master_</sub></sub>

These are turbulent times in which we live. Mankind is harassed by tensions, fears and phobias. The collective disease of humanity is that man is so hypnotized by the world, so engrossed in worries and fears, that he has forgotten his true essence, that which is beyond thought and form. He is so consumed by time, that he has forgotten eternity. Instead of focusing his gaze on the Lord, he looks down at his wobbly legs and finds it difficult to hold his stance. His fear keeps him rooted on the spot, or worse, it allows him to fall.

To some extent we are all afraid, and when we allow this fear to dominate our thoughts, we forget all logic, and react badly to the events that play out before us. Like a deer that is caught in the headlights, instead of running off the highway to safety, it freezes in its tracks, waiting for the accident to happen.

We allow fear to take control of our thoughts and our lives, be it the fear of flying or the fear of dying; the fear of illness, pain or suffering. And the pain that we feel is very real to us – so real that it can sometimes be unbearable, leaving us crying in agony. But this suffering is of our own making – our destiny is the outcome of our past karmas.

Fortunately, the Master does not leave us to face these karmas alone. He faces these times with us, supporting us so that we don’t lose our balance. Time and again, he shows us in many ways that his presence in our lives is even more real than the pain that we experience. We have only to keep our focus on him, like the child who is focused on his father, taking his baby steps towards the father’s outstretched embrace, oblivious to all that is around him. Maharaj Charan Singh lovingly explains:

> Whatever karmas we are born with, whether they are good or bad karmas, we have to go through them without losing our mental balance, taking them as the will of the Father.
> Whatever we have sown in the past birth, whether it is good or bad karma, we have taken this birth now to reap the results of those karmas. So we have to live in the will of the Lord and pay for all those karmas without losing our balance. We can do this only if we are filled with love and devotion for the Father. Without this love and devotion it is not possible for us to live in the will of the Lord.
> <sub><sub>_Thus Saith the Master_</sub></sub>

The Master’s protecting hand is always within our reach, helping us retain our balance, shielding us from being buffeted by our karmas.

As the saying goes: “The will of God will never take you where the grace of God cannot protect you.”

Whatever may happen, wherever we may go, the Master’s grace is always with us, like a shelter that protects us from the raging storm. He has tied us to himself with this knot of initiation and given us the ways and means to turn our focus to him and him alone – through meditation.

> With the help of meditation, you are able to rise above these fears and you are able to shed them all. Otherwise, in one way or another, you are always frightened of something or other. We must attend to our meditation, and slowly and slowly, we are able to shed all those fears, and we become fearless. Then we’re not frightened of anything, whatever may happen in this creation. Meditation makes us fearless.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Thus Saith the Master_</sub>

## Contentment

On one of Maharaj Charan Singh’s visits to Indore, he was accompanied by Mr Sam Busa, one of his representatives in South Africa. In the evening, Maharaj Ji asked Sam to visit the satsang area and see how things were arranged by the local satsang centre.

It was about ten o’clock at night when Sam, in the company of a sevadar, reached the satsang ground. Most of the satsangis had retired for the night. Sam was taken around the entire complex and shown all the tents, shamianas and places where the sangat was sleeping. It was a cold February night, and because of the very large gathering of satsangis, enough covered sleeping space was not available. Many satsangis, both young and old, were therefore sleeping under the trees, covering themselves with only a thick cotton sheet.

In the morning, Maharaj Ji asked Sam if he had made a round of the satsang complex. Sam replied, “Yes, Maharaj Ji, I did. But I felt very sad, for people were lying on the bare ground under the tents and even in the open under the trees. It was very cold, and they had only ordinary cotton sheets or mats with which to cover themselves. I was shocked; their standard of living is very poor.”

Maharaj Ji smiled softly and said, “Yes Sam, their standard of living is very poor, but their standard of contentment is very high.”
> <sub><sub>_Treasure Beyond Measure_</sub></sub>

> Happiness does not lie in wealth and property, but in contentment.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, as quoted in _Treasure Beyond Measure_</sub>

## Positively Biased

Justice – it is the paradox of our existence. We assume it, and even demand it, but when we stand before a judge and jury we dread it. Not necessarily because we are guilty, for we might be completely innocent. But we still fear the judgment. We dread it because we realize that there is one factor in this physical world that even our innocence cannot withstand – bias.

Why does it surprise us that we are faced with imperfect justice in an imperfect world? Being human inevitably involves emotions, preferences, preconceived beliefs and prejudices – all things that result in a person who is biased rather than perfectly fair: predisposed to one side, not perfectly impartial. This is the predicament we are living with in this realm of the flesh. It is the epitome of duality – that in a universe governed by the karmic theory of perfect justice, we are living amidst bias and inequity.

Immersed in this quagmire, we have pitifully become a part of it. Our mind, happy to adopt yet another perversion, has distorted its innate ability to discriminate and rendered itself prejudicial in practically every respect. And worse than that, it has also become judgmental and condemnatory. How sad it is that every facet of life is blanketed by the shadow of a negative bias. And how much sadder that we fail to even see it. We never notice our own prejudices even when we complain bitterly about those of our fellow inmates. We never realize our own judgmental attitude even when we suffer the painful barbs hurled at us by others. We ignore the ugly tint cast by our own jaundiced eyes even when we are repulsed by the lack of impartiality of our peers. We have been infected by the viral nature of this biased world, and we have surrendered to it with total abandon – lock, stock and barrel.

Wearing our shroud of negative bias, we thus push forward on the treadmill of life. And day after day, as we move closer to that fateful moment of our final breath, we sometimes forget that we will soon stand before our Maker, when our every act will play back for us, either in full glory or in utter shame. And it is at that moment of perfect justice that the irony will hit us: that it is not justice we actually desire – not neutrality, but something else. When it comes to our failings, our offences, what we really want is to be judged with a positive bias. We want mercy and forgiveness.

The physical world has conditioned us, consciously or unconsciously, to behave with a negative bias. To judge and to condemn, based on the notion that justice must be served. But what is justice? It is the application of rules and laws to administer the appropriate punishment for every crime. And thus, perfect justice requires a perfectly neutral and unbiased judge, a neutrality that stems from absolute objectivity and complete lack of emotion – in other words, a judgment devoid of compassion, forgiveness, mercy and most of all, love.

And this is where the hat drops, for if there is love, there can never be neutrality – only partiality. Our final desire to be judged with a favourable prejudice is, in fact, a desire to be judged with love, the very essence of our Creator.

From the darkest depths of our transmigratory nightmare, love carries us to the very heights of pure spirit. And learning to live life positively biased with love and compassion must be the greatest achievement of human birth, for it alone enables us to make that journey from where there is truly no return – the leap from here to eternity.

## Having Faith

It had been a distressing month. There had been news of friends and family, one after another experiencing some form of tragedy or misfortune. We watched a dear friend lose a loved one. Another suddenly discovered she had a debilitating illness and had to be hospitalized in order to undergo excruciating treatments. And a third acquaintance had business problems and was going through a major financial crisis. Each one of them was carrying a heavy burden, and as much as we tried to help them, all we could do was bear witness to their pain. There was no way we could understand what they were going through.

However, there was a lesson to be learned from all those who went through this phase in life: the ones who kept their faith alive, who held on to the Master’s hand and accepted their fate, who made every effort to carry on with their lives positively, came out stronger in the end. When it seemed as though their world had fallen apart, and we wondered how they would pick up the pieces of their shattered lives, they were able to sail through their problems and come out shining, stronger than ever – purely because they held on to the power of faith in the Master. They saw the Master as the navigator of their lives and believed that whatever happened, however painful it was, took place for a reason, and behind the scenes they experienced a greater power giving them the support and strength to go on. We witnessed how Master’s grace was amazing, but that one could only experience this grace if one holds on with unshakeable faith and love, without blaming the Lord for the pain that one has to go through.

In _The Practice of the Presence of God_, Brother Lawrence writes:

> When He finds a soul penetrated with a lively faith, He pours into it His grace and favours plentifully: there they flow like a torrent, which after being forcibly stopped against its ordinary course, when it has found a passage, spreads itself with impetuosity and abundance.

Faith is such a great power that it can give each of us an unbelievable amount of strength. If we were filled with faith in the Lord, life would be so peaceful, we would be surrounded with so much positivity and we would experience His presence in every facet of our lives. As Kabir has said (as quoted in _Sultan Bahu_): “Whosoever has faith in his mind has the Master always with him.” However, where there is no faith, life would be empty and filled with cold darkness. Faith is the rock whereby one goes through the path of the known to the unknown courageously and with self-confidence; it is where one finds shelter from fear and worries. It enables us to keep our sense of balance even when strong winds seek to throw us off course. Faith keeps us bound to our Lord at all times, good and bad.

> Faith is the foundation on which the whole superstructure of religion and spiritual progress stands. It is the root of the tree of Godliness. Without faith there can be no achievement in any worldly art or spiritual matter. Faith is the most precious of gifts that the Lord can confer on a devotee. If one has little meditation to his credit but has full faith and love, his future is assured.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

However, faith does not come so easily. The analytical nature of the mind encourages us to question, to have faith only in that which can be proven. In fact, Sant Mat asks us to explore the teachings so that we can experience the truth within ourselves. True faith, therefore, is not blind. Faith is based on our experience which we receive through sincere practice. We have faith, therefore, when we courageously dedicate ourselves to proving truths beyond our grasp, following the lead of our Master. Saint Augustine has given the definition:

> Faith is to believe what you do not see; the reward of this faith is to see what you believe.
> <sub>_Creeds of Faith and Inspiration_</sub>

So how does one cultivate this faith within? Faith is not something that we can attain by asking. The saints tell us that sincere meditation will build our faith in the Master and the teachings. Faith comes from our meditation and faith also supports our meditation.

> Please remember that true faith only comes from meditation. The more you meditate with love and devotion, the more faith you get.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

Walking along the spiritual path is like trekking through jagged mountains. We will experience the highs and the lows – there will be times when we are inspired by his love, and faith is easy; yet there will be times when we have to climb steep rocks and the journey is difficult. However, a disciple who continues to persevere will slowly begin to overcome these obstacles. Gradually, he will enjoy the meditation practice. This then feeds his faith and love, and he attends even more eagerly to meditation.

As Maharaj Charan Singh explains:

> The more time you give to meditation, the more grace of the Master comes to you in the form of love and devotion. The Master is within you and sees what you are doing. He never keeps back the wages of anyone. Sant Mat is not a path of disappointments or failures; it is one of joy, success and eternal bliss.
> <sub><sub>_Quest for Light_</sub></sub>

Life will throw many challenges our way where our faith in the Lord is tested. However, if we build our lives according to the teachings of the Masters and attend to our meditation sincerely, we will build a strong spiritual foundation, so much so that nothing can shake our faith. We will face life boldly, holding the Master’s hand. Just as a child has nothing to fear if his parents stand by his side, we too will always feel secure in the Master’s inner presence. We will truly believe: “With faith all things are possible.”

> If one’s faith is firm and unshakeable, and one daily gives time to the practices, and has no worldly desires, then there is no power which can bring one back to this plane.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

## The Third Vow
**As Explained by Maharaj Charan Singh**

All the vows are very important. If we don’t have a good moral character outside, we can never make progress within at all. There are so many temptations within. If you are weak outside, you’ll be more miserable and weak within; you’ll never be able to make much progress.

Then, if our attention is always dropping to lower centres, it is difficult to withdraw our consciousness up to the eye centre. Unless we lead a good, clean life, and unless we are able to concentrate here at the eye centre, we can never make progress at all.

And we are also sowing seeds. Christ made this very clear in the Bible when the people were about to stone a lady accused of adultery. Of course he saved her, but he also advised her: “Go and sin no more.” And to the man whom he cured, he said: “You have become whole; go and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.” You must abstain from all these things, and since you have been put on the path, you have the opportunity to become whole now. And “a worse thing come unto thee” means you may have to come back to this creation again to pay for all these karmas if you don’t abstain from these acts.

Then Christ also explained how to account for what you have done.

He says, “If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.” Withdraw your consciousness to the eye centre and see that Light within yourself. That Light and Sound will help you to purify your mind, by pulling it from the senses and taking it back to its source.

<sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

## The Only One in the World to Love

**A New Birth – 18 June 2005**
Exactly four years ago, the most gracious gift of all gifts was granted to me – the gift of initiation. I was the young girl who felt that this was it – that this in itself was an end, an achievement. And sitting for my meditation for two and a half hours daily was going to be an easy routine.

**A Newer Reality – 18 June 2009**
I wondered what life before 2005 was. I corrected my thoughts: life was not life then. It was mere existence. And neither was meditation easy, nor was it a routine, to be done and finished with. Meditation was, as Dr Julian Johnson put it, “a living vibrant force – it could be heard, and its power could be felt.” Of course, it took me years to understand this. Even today, I am a young baby and am only scratching the surface of the vast reality within.

But there are days, like today, when that feeling arises more strongly. When you realize the treasure you have received is no small one. That it is not a treasure that is hidden, but one that permeates each cell of your being; that shapes each thought, each action, each desire.

And the more you meditate, the more you want to meditate, the more you feel the need, the craving to meditate from within. When simran has become the only mode of conversation with the Divine, (and how badly you need to converse with the Divine!), when the world is falling apart, when fear surrounds you, when anger consumes you, when complaints are the only vibes that flow from you, when it is beyond any human being’s capacity to help you even if they wished to, you turn to simran. And He listens to you; you feel it. Churning each round, you just put in your effort.

**The Only One in the World to Love**
And before you know it, you feel the difference, you feel the presence. You feel that awareness of being listened to, of being loved … like you were the only one in the world to love! And you know what the magic potion is; and that is when you do not want to leave it – no matter what your circumstance in life is. Whether you are content with life or complaining, meditation becomes your insatiable need – your first priority, your constant contact.

**And So…**
On days like these, you want to pause and reflect … and thank the Divine for nothing else except this gift, without which everything else is bland. You want to vow yet again to keep doing your best. You want to live with the divine presence throughout your day. You thank Him for never leaving you, for being faithfully present and patiently persistent, for loving each one of His children as if she were the only one in the world to love.

> O my God, the best of Thy gifts within my heart is the hope of Thee and the sweetest word upon my tongue is Thy praise, and the hours which I love best are those in which I meet with Thee.
> <sub>Rabia Basri, as quoted in _Rabi’a the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints in Islam_</sub>

## Did You Know?

One way of speeding up the progress is to keep on repeating the five holy Names mentally any time – whenever you are not particularly busy or are engaged in work which does not require presence of mind. You may do this without attracting attention or inviting comment, but the moment something has to be attended to which requires your attention, you may stop your mental repetition and attend to the work at hand. This will enable you to concentrate more easily when you sit for meditation at the appointed time.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Sant Mat_</sub>

<sub>---</sub>

Wealth or poverty depends upon the absence or presence of desires, respectively. He who has no desires is rich. He who does not desire anything is a sovereign.

<sub><sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

<sub>---</sub>

The more diligently disciples practise their spiritual exercises and the more they advance on the path, the greater their sensitivity to the inner guidance of the Master will become, and the more readily they will follow the inner impulses and inspiration, which they will perceive more clearly, more frequently and irresistibly. They will experience the ‘pull within’ more strongly and the invisible presence of their Master will become even more perceptible to them. Their longing for meditation will intensify and their need for worldly things will lessen.

<sub><sub>_Adventure of Faith_</sub></sub>

## The Master Answers
**A selection of questions and answers with Maharaj Charan Singh**

**_Q: Why does meditation get harder instead of easier? At first you can do two and a half hours when you start, but it seems more and more difficult. Initiates, when new, seem to do better than those who have struggled for a long time. Many satsangis find meditation increasingly difficult._**

**A: That is what they feel, that it is becoming increasingly difficult, because they become so anxious to achieve what they wantto achieve, that when they don’t achieve it, they think their meditation is becoming difficult. Actually, it is becoming easier and easier. The very fact that they feel it is becoming difficult is because of their longing, the desire in their heart and their mind to go back to the Lord. And that is His love. More longing and love is coming in them, and they’re becoming more anxious and more desperate to go back to Him. They’re achieving the result of meditation without their even realizing it. For the devotion, the love, and the earnestness that is coming in us every day to go back to the Father paves our way ahead.**
---
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

**_Q: Besides getting more sleep, would you advise repeating these Names slower so that the mind would be forced to concentrate?_**

**A: No, speed of repetition does not make any difference. Whether we do it fast or slow, does not make any difference. We should just do it at normal speed. It is concentration which matters here. That is the main thing. You should do your simran with the attention and while keeping it here, at the eye centre.**
> <sub><sub>_The Master Answers_</sub></sub>

**_Q: Is not God’s grace the power to shape all that we are destined to become?_**

**A: God’s grace is always there, but brother, we have to become receptive to His grace. If it is raining very heavily and your cup is upside down, not a drop of water will get into it. You haveto put that cup with the right side up, then it will be filled with rain water. So, God’s grace is always there, within every one of us, but we have to be receptive to that grace, and by receptive I mean that we have to withdraw our consciousness to that point where His grace is coming day and night. Unless we attach ourselves to that and unless we are filled with that love and devotion to the Lord, naturally these desires and attachments of the world will not go out of us. There is no limit to His grace, which is everywhere, but we have to be receptive.**
> <sub><sub>_The Master Answers_</sub></sub>

---

**_Q: Should we resist or avoid someone who is not friendly or aggressive?_**

**A: You can save yourself from the situation. Christ said: “Be wise like a serpent and harmless like a dove.” The moment a serpent hears any noise, he at once leaves.“Be harmless like a dove.” Don’t harm anybody at all. But he says, be wise like a serpent, not harmful like a serpent. A serpent can harm or even kill you with his poison. So he says: learn from a serpent. Avoid the situation. Why meet trouble unnecessarily, if you can avoid that situation? Be wise. And having all the power with you, be harmless like a dove.**
> <sub><sub>_Thus Saith the Master_</sub></sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh at mitti seva

## A Soul’s Quest

As travellers on this journey of life, we soon realize that no amount of material riches can lead to fulfilment. Our endless struggles have only led to further resentment, bitterness and discontent. Despite the hustle of everyday life, a certain sense of loneliness dwells in the heart of the disciple. When this awareness dawns on him, he sees life from a whole new dimension.

He then embarks upon an inner journey in search for answers to his spiritual quest. An iota of spiritual hunger has set in, a tiny flame has been ignited in his deep recesses and he longs to fulfil his soul’s desire. It is precisely at this time of his life that God mysteriously intervenes. The aspirant enters into a direct personal communion with a mentor, a spiritual director, one who will guide him on every step of his inner journey.

As a sincere seeker, he undergoes significant phases. Struggling with his mind, he keeps his faith steadfast, believing that he will someday penetrate the darkness within. He wakes up before the break of dawn, hoping to meet his Beloved, hoping to meet his Friend whom he has been told is always accessible, always ready to answer his call. He tries to still his mind and shrugs off every thought that stands in his way of spiritual progress. He experiences certain indications, though they may be subtle, of the existence of the higher consciousness and earnestly longs to deepen his communion.

However, there comes a time in each disciple’s life when he feels that he can no longer move on. Devotion to God seems to lose its gratifying value, contemplation becomes extremely difficult and totally unrewarding, the spiritual terrain has changed beyond recognition, and a sense of absence prevails. At such a time, what must the disciple do if he is experiencing darkness, if the shadows of doubt of God’s existence are creeping in, if his doubts are blurring his vision of faith? In _The Cloud of Unknowing_, the mystic reassures the soul:

> Lift up your heart to God with a humble impulse of love and have Himself as your aim, not any of His goods ... Set yourself to rest in this darkness, always crying out after Him whom you love. For if you are to experience Him or to see Him at all, insofar as it is possible here, it must always be in this cloud and in this darkness.

This spiritual journey is a loving courtship between God and the soul, and without this process of purification, the soul would never be able to fully experience the abundance of spiritual splendour that is awaiting it. Like gold that must be refined in a blazing fire in order to show its true purity, the soul is being refined in the flame of God’s love.

The Lord’s purpose of concealing Himself is to rouse in the seeker a deeper yearning; it is His calling for the sincere aspirant to come deeper into His realm.

> Therefore, O spiritual soul, when thou seest thy desire obscured, thy affections arid and constrained, and thy faculties bereft of their capacity for any interior exercise, be not afflicted by this, but rather consider it a great happiness, since God is freeing thee from thyself and taking the matter from thy hands.
> <sub>Saint John of the Cross, _Dark Night of the Soul_</sub>

The Beloved is ever watchful and protective of the soul who is lost in the wilderness; and the soul should remain faithful and continue to persevere in the face of difficulties. Unless the disciple remains steadfast and harbours the deepest commitment to the path, and unless he sincerely yearns for his Beloved to be the sole inhabitant of his heart, he can never experience God’s presence and unfathomable love. When the Lord finds such a faithful soul, out of sheer grace He reaches out and takes it into His loving arms.

Saint Thérèse of Lisieux herself endured great hardships in her inner quest, but expressed her rejoicing on obtaining her abode in His sanctuary. She encouraged all who despaired to rise above their disappointments and to persevere in their efforts.

> By practising all the virtues, keep lifting your little foot to climb the stairs of sanctity and do not think that you will be able to get up even to the first step. At the top of these stairs, He (God) is looking at you lovingly. Soon conquered by your vain efforts, He will come down Himself, and, taking you in His arms, will carry you forever in His kingdom where you will not leave Him again.
> <sub>_My Vocation Is Love: Thérèse of Lisieux,_as rendered by Jean LaFrance</sub>

The soul then realizes that it was the Lord’s grace that created the void in the first place and it was the Lord’s grace that cleared the void. It becomes aware of its own weaknesses and how little it would have progressed on this inward journey had the Lord truly forsaken it.

Having had first-hand encounter with the Beloved, the soul then longs for nothing more except the ‘burning of the heart’ to remain aflame. These words are echoed by Rumi, who expressed his yearning for the Lord’s presence and desire for his flame never to be extinguished:

> It is a burning of the heart that I want; it is this burning that is everything, more precious than the empire of the world, because it calls God secretly in the night.
> <sub>As quoted in _Thinking Outside the Church: 110 Ways to Connect with your Spiritual Nature_</sub>

The soul now realizes that this ‘burning of the heart’ was a necessary progression for the soul to attain spiritual bliss, as it now rests in the ecstasy of the Beloved’s warmth.

**_Accommodation_**
**_Accommodation_**
**_Booking_**
**_Booking_**
**_Office_**
**_Office_**
?
?

SPIRITUALISTICKSc

**In Top Form**

<sub>**I wonder why these forms are on glossy paper?**</sub>

<sub>**APPLICATION FORMS**</sub>

<sub>**I dunno...**</sub>
> <sub>**Maybe this is the**</sub>
> <sub>_Radiant Form._</sub>

<sub>**APPLICATION FORMS**</sub>

## Memorable Quotes

_One who practises humility before all created things captures the Creator._
> <sub><sub>Tukaram</sub></sub>

_The value of seva is not how much one offers, but in the feelings and love with which it is offered._
> <sub><sub>Maharaj Charan Singh</sub></sub>

_Happiness on earth is but a fleet and passing ghost, which man craves at any cost in gold or time. And when the phantom becomes the reality, man soon wearies of it._
> <sub><sub>Kahlil Gibran</sub></sub>

_Thy right is to thy work, but not to its results. Let not the fruit of action be thy motive, nor be attached to inaction._
> <sub><sub>Bhagavad Gita</sub></sub>

_People travel to wonder at the height of the mountains, at the huge waves of the seas, at the long course of the rivers, at the vast compass of the ocean, at the circular motion of the stars, and yet they pass by themselves without wondering._
> <sub><sub>Saint Augustine</sub></sub>

_Your task is not to seek for love, but merely to seek and find all the barriers within yourself that you have built against it._
> <sub><sub>Maulana Rum</sub></sub>

## Anticipation

The opportunity to see the Master in his physical form gives us something to look forward to. The minute we know that we will be able to spend a few days with him, we mark it down on our calendars, and from then on, the countdown begins. Our minds become absorbed in the thought of our beloved, and we constantly find ourselves in a world of our own. We imagine the various scenarios that could unfold when we are with him. Hundreds and thousands of thoughts occupy our mind and we secretly hope that something out of the ordinary will happen.

From the moment we mark that date down on the calendar, we start becoming his ‘good’ children. We attend to our meditation more regularly, we focus more on our seva, and above all, we get so immersed in the anticipation of it all, that we start to worry less about our worldly activities. Gossip takes a backseat in our lives – it is no longer as important who wears what, and who said what to whom.

Desires for a bigger house, a better car and more wealth disappear temporarily, as we now desire only him. Slowly but surely, we try to become true to the word ‘disciple’.

This feeling is what we all seek on a permanent basis. Especially after a trip to the Dera or when the Master visits us for a few days, we convince ourselves that we will make this feeling last. It is unfortunate, though, that no matter how much we desire it, somehow after a few days back into our daily routine, the feeling just fades away.

Perhaps it is the depth to which we are involved in our materialistic lives that causes this sudden change. Or perhaps it is because we depend so much on the Master’s physical form that our minds only allow us this feeling when we know we are going to see him.

The saints have used the relationship of a parent and child to describe the bond between Master and disciple. Many times, in their satsangs, they have explained how dependency pulls a child down. The love of a parent is meant to help a child grow in confidence and eventually become independent. However, if the relationship becomes one of dependency, then that child will never be able to stand on his own feet. The same applies to us with our Master. He gives us that love, but the whole objective of him doing this is so that we can be inspired to meditate and seek him within. Only then will that feeling, which we are all trying so desperately to achieve, become permanent.

The question to ask ourselves is: how badly do we want it? If we remember just for an instant how that feeling entirely transforms us and inspires us, then yes, we want it. We should want it. The real form of our Master is his Shabd form and to create that permanent love, that is what we really need to seek. It is time to graduate to a higher level of love and experience a state that thus far we have only heard about – one that we know will truly surpass the imagination. Maharaj Charan Singh summarizes it beautifully in _Legacy of Love_:

> May your love for the form culminate in the love of the formless.

## Repartee of the Wise

A seeker went to visit Rabia Basri. He found in her home a partly broken jug, a very old straw mat on which she slept and a brick which she used as a pillow. The seeker said: “I have many wealthy friends.

Shall I ask them to bring some items for you?”

Rabia replied: “Is my Provider, your Provider and the Provider of the wealthy not the same Being?”

The seeker replied: “Yes.” Rabia then said: “Has He forgotten about the needs of the poor on account of their poverty while remembering the needs of the wealthy?”

The seeker replied: “No, that is not true.”

Rabia then said: “When He never forgets anyone, why should we remind Him? He has wished this condition for me and I am pleased with it because that is His pleasure.”

---

A group of disciples were discussing the definition of the quote: “Those who know, do not say; those who say, do not know.” When their Master entered the room, they asked him to explain the meaning of the quote. The Master asked his disciples, “Who among you knows the fragrance of a rose?” All of the disciples replied confidently that they knew. The Master then said, “Put it into words.” All of the disciples were silent.

## The Space in Between

When we are blessed by the physical presence of the Master – whether through his visit to our country or our trip to the Dera – our meditation is filled with renewed hope and resolve. We feel closer to him and his presence in our lives becomes palpable.

We realize that we are tired of the suffering and sorrow that assails our daily lives. We finally comprehend what the Master has been telling us all along: it is time to graduate to the next level in Sant Mat where all that matters is our practice. We realize that now is the time for action.

Over time, however, despite our dedication, it is possible to become despondent over our lack of progress. In a result-oriented world, we are disappointed when we do not achieve the inner experiences we expect; the dryness of our meditation becomes overwhelming. We feel we are suspended in an in-between world where our love is not strong enough to pull us to the Master but at the same time we do not enjoy the world either.

An ancient Indian philosopher has given the example of the potter’s wheel to describe this stage of the disciple’s life. The mind is doing its job by spinning the wheel to create pots full of thoughts and desires.

When the mind stops spinning the wheel, even though desires are not being created, the wheel goes on spinning out of the momentum of past karma.

And so, this space in between the Master and disciple, while painful, is a natural step in our evolution to achieving union with the Lord. The wheel needs to continue to spin so that our karmas are completed.

Indeed it is at this stage where we most need to retain our positivity and approach our meditation with renewed resolve. Once we put in dedicated effort, the Lord will surely hear our pleas. As Maharaj Jagat Singh says:

> So long as we lean on others He lets us do so, but when after repeated disappointments, we surrender to him completely, regarding Him as our only sheet-anchor, He comes to our succour instantly.
> <sub>_The Science of the Soul_</sub>

At times like this, we need to remember not to focus on the results of our meditation but on our effort. One is reminded of the story of a disciple during the times of the Great Master. The disciple decided to isolate himself in the hot summer months to dedicate his time fully to meditation. Unfortunately, all did not go as planned. The mind rebelled, his meditation was dry, and after one month he felt that he had achieved no progress. Full of disappointment, he went back to the Great Master and asked why his Master made him waste a whole month without any tangible results. The Great Master patiently and lovingly explained that what matters is the effort not the results, for it is our efforts that will result in the opening of the Lord’s floodgates of mercy.

So also the Lord will accept even our most feeble attempts at devotion, provided they are grounded in love and sincerity. Maharaj Charan Singh used to give the example of the benevolent teacher who allows dedicated students who have shown demonstrated effort to graduate to the next class even if their exam results fall short of a passing grade.

In the final analysis, as we read in the Adi Granth:

> We meet Him, only when He causes us to meet.

Maharaj Charan Singh used to tell us that all we can do is knock on the door. One day the Lord has to open the door and let us into His presence.

And so, when the space between the Master and us becomes unbearable, we must remember that no teacher is more benevolent than our Master. Our duty is just to sit diligently for our meditation and wait for the wheel of karmas to come to a standstill. It is not for us to evaluate or analyze the quality of our meditation. Indeed, our posture does not matter; the results do not matter; all that matters is our effort, our love and our sincerity towards eliminating this space in between – forever.

> O God,
> You exist. I exist not.
> Can that which exists not demand something from that which exists?
> Who am I to do such a thing?
> <sub>Khwaja ‘Abdullah Ansari, _Intimate Conversations_</sub>

## Falling in Love

Love. We have no control over it. When we fall in love, we truly fall. We plunge deeply, head over heels, with such intensity and velocity that we push aside all obstacles in our way. Albert Einstein himself said that “gravitation cannot be held responsible for people falling in love!” It is another force – a force more powerful than us that tugs at our soul from deep within. We hardly have any choice in the matter. And just like that, at the snap of divine fingers, we find ourselves right in the middle of the vortex of love.

Falling in love is actually quite simple, and often takes very little effort on our part – it just happens. And in that state of intoxication, we often make romantic promises and lifelong commitments to our lovers “to love and to cherish, in sickness and in health until death do us part.” In such a state, many of us have promised our beloved Master that we will meditate for two and a half hours every day.

The velocity of that initial fall into love fuels us at first, and every chance we get, we want to sit silently in remembrance of our beloved. For many of us though, this honeymoon period soon comes to an end.

What happens when we wake up one morning and no longer have the desire to meditate? How are we to cope when the love that once fuelled us starts to feel like a distant emotion – like a vague memory or blurred glimpse of a beautiful dream that we once lived?

When falling in love was effortless, why is staying in love such a challenge? The truth is, falling in love was a divine gift of sorts to bless our union; whereas staying in love requires hard work on our part.

A seed of love was planted deep within us, and how magnificently intense it felt to have the divine gardener stroke our soul; but now it is our responsibility to water that seed in order to keep our love alive and help it to grow.

> Everybody can grow that feeling, that love, that intensity by meditation.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Die to Live_</sub>

Nonetheless, when love’s intensity has weakened, and the gardener is nowhere in sight, we can easily begin to grow desperate. We start to plead, cry and beg for grace, for mercy and for love! We want to jump right back into the vortex of love! But Maharaj Jagat Singh explains that our cries are useless unless they are supported by effort:

> Our prayers and pleadings are quite useless, unless these are supported by all the effort on our part to push the door open. Remember that a Master cannot be deceived or cheated. Unless the yearning to meet him is intense and true, he remains silent and unattentive.
> <sub><sub>_The Science of the Soul_</sub></sub>

Perhaps our petition for love should be made in a language that he understands – our meditation. Our cry for love is better heard when made in the silence and stillness of our hearts – rather than by calling out to the Master for grace every time we stop putting in our efforts. Mirdad explains:

> Be not in a haste to importune the smith each time you lose or misplace the key. The smith has done his work, and he has done it well; and he must not be asked to do the same work over and again. Do your work, and let the smith alone; for he, once done with you, has other business to attend. Remove the stench and rubbish from your memory, and you shall surely find the key.
> <sub><sub>_The Book of Mirdad_</sub></sub>

The truth is that everything we will ever need to tread this path was given to us at the time of initiation. We received the gift of love, as well as the key to keep that love intense and alive. Meditation is the only key, meditation is the only answer, and meditation is the sole door back into that intoxicating state of love. We must keep the vows we made to our lover, and rest assured, our lover will keep the promise he made to us. And before we know it, just like that, we will find ourselves falling helplessly in love all over again.

> When your love for that power exceeds your love for yourself and the “I-ness” has been replaced by “Thou-ness”, the form of the Guru will make its appearance visible within.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

## Spirituality:

## A Way to Live, A Way to Return

Nowadays, irrespective of how simple or complex a piece of equipment, appliance or gadget we purchase is, a user manual is included. Consumers are advised to go through it to gain better understanding of the parts, function, care and maintenance of the equipment. We seem to be able to master the operations of every model of even the most complex of cameras, mobile phones, laptop computers and an endless list of gadgets. But have we ever given serious thought to the human body? Where do we find the care and instruction manual for this intricate masterpiece? More importantly, have we acquired mastery of its functions and operations?

Sure, we have doctors, fitness trainers and nutritionists, to name but a few – professionals who advise us on issues of the physical. But what about the essence of the human body – our true form, our only reality
– the soul or spirit? The saints tell us that the outer garment is simply that, and serious thought should be given to the care and nourishment of the soul as it is immortal, divine and of noble heritage. It outlives this physical shell and bears the consequences of choices that are made by the weakened unruly mind, which itself is under the domain of the senses. The soul or spirit is what breathes life and gives form and meaning to the physical.

In _The Path of the Masters_ it is explained: “The individual soul or spirit is the real man, it is a spark from the infinite Light, a drop from the ocean of Being. As such, it is one with Him, one in substance, one in qualities. It is in the soul that all consciousness and all power resides. All below the soul, even the mind itself, is unconscious, automatic and mechanical in action. In fact, everything in existence is entirely dependent upon spirit for its life and activity. Even the humblest plant or the smallest insect lives and carries on its activities by virtue of spirit, the tiny spark of spirit that gives it being. All else in man passes away or is discarded by him on his upward flight towards perfect freedom.”

The Masters, through their discourses, remind us that although we are housed in a body, we are not the body – we are spiritual beings going through the experience of being human. Thus they maintain that it is only through the process of spirituality, of spiritualizing ourselves, that we are able to empower our soul consciousness, acknowledge its existence and free it from the bondage of the mind. They tell us that we have to work on overcoming our weakness of strongly identifying ourselves with the outer physical form and the material world. Our top priority should be to consider our obligation to our spirit. And the practical way to instill or apply spirituality to our lives is through the process of meditation as taught by the Masters. After initiation by a perfect living Master, meditation consists of withdrawing the attention to the eye focus through repetition of the holy Names, contemplation on the form of the Master, and listening to the inner Sound for a minimum of two and a half hours daily. The Masters tell us that the instant we sit for meditation, we actually begin to tread the spiritual path, and it is also at this moment where concepts begin to be left behind and experience begins.

Meditation is a cleansing process for the mind, whereby it gradually becomes purified, refined and uplifted. Moreover, it enhances the development of positive human qualities such as humility, kindness, compassion, patience and understanding. These positive qualities enable us to think positively; they strengthen our mind to act in our long-term interest. We develop a better and more accurate understanding of the reality of our human condition, and are thus better equipped to face the ups and downs of life with equanimity.

Listening to spiritual discourses, reading spiritual literature and attending to seva are tools that can inspire us to pursue our meditation practice with fervour. We can further support our spiritual endeavors by being selective and vigilant about the things we choose to see, hear, talk or think about, as well as the company we keep. Spirituality and meditation should take a practical shape in our lives, reflecting in daily action and in our whole routine. We are advised:

> If we want to achieve higher levels of spirituality, we must take action. We must take the steps that will lead us in that direction. Our actions must reflect our spiritual desire. If the desire for communion with Shabd is not reflected in our actions, either we are confused or we do not want to evolve spiritually. Our spiritual desire has to be expressed in the way we live, in the way we speak, in the way we think and adhere to the principles of the path. Most of all, it has to be expressed through our meditation.
> <sub><sub>_Living Meditation_</sub></sub>

The spiritual path gives us much wisdom, guidance, light, sustenance, strength and consolation. It is, in fact, the ‘user’s manual’ for the upkeep of our soul. The Master is our spiritual mentor, our spiritual Father. By initiating us, he starts us on our homeward journey. And by doing so, he also gives clear purpose and direction to our life. The Masters advise us that by practising meditation daily, we can embark on the spiritual journey and, in the process, develop clear thinking, peace of mind and inner joy. And by perfecting this method, we gain liberation from the cycle of birth and death, and experience eternal bliss.

> Maharaj Charan Singh

## Heart to Heart

From the time Baba Jaimal Singh appointed Maharaj Sawan Singh as his successor, Hazur’s mother no longer regarded him as a son but treated him with the reverence due a Master. I can still vividly recall an episode when Maharaj Ji, dressed all in white, came out into the courtyard and stood with his hands folded respectfully in front of his mother. Although Hazur was mature and stately, he stood before his mother like a loving child. His mother, also dressed in white, folded her hands in reverence to Maharaj Ji. Maharaj Ji said, “Mother, please don’t fold your hands like this.” In a tone of affection and respect, his mother said, “Please permit me – you are more than a son to me.”

<sub>Daryai Lal Kapur, _Heaven on Earth_</sub>

<sub>---</sub>

Maharaj Ji was on holiday. He entered the houseboat lounge looking dashing in his elegant churidar pyjama and kurta, and commented, “I feel like doing satsang.” His companions enthusiastically responded, “Please sit down on this divan and talk to us of love.” “What,” he asked, “can I tell you of love? Do you know what love is? Love is a gift from the Lord.” Lighthearted, and most beautifully, he had given the saints’ teachings in a nutshell.

<sub><sub>_Legacy of Love_</sub></sub>

## Book Review

**One Light Many Lamps**

Written and Illustrated by Victoria Jones

Publisher: Radha Soami Satsang Beas, Punjab, India, 2009. ISBN: 978-81-8256-815-0

Sometimes the truth can best be shown in a language that even a child can understand. In a world where many religions claim that they hold the exclusive franchise on salvation, where ethnic conflicts lead to persecution and bloodshed, it is refreshing to discover a new children’s book, published by Radha Soami Satsang Beas, entitled _One Light Many Lamps_. The text does not try to indoctrinate its readers into religious beliefs or advance any divisions or distinctions between human beings. Instead, author and illustrator Victoria Jones offers a spiritual vision of humanity, portraying every human being as a child of God, loved by God and full of the light and music of the divine.

The lively illustrations offer a colourful and sparkling imagining of a creation whose dimensions are vast and mysterious. The Lord is depicted as a luminous being taking a small baby in His arms, and showing the child both the majesty of the inner realms and the splendour shining in this world. God is concerned to show even this tiny child the love that creates all life, and the power and light that reside in all souls. One can hardly look at the illustrations and not acknowledge the universal presence of God in the world. This message is powerfully and beautifully made evident in the bright eyes of children, children of every culture and land.

The author weaves the story around one baby who is soon to be born. Before its birth, the Lord wants to give this “Little Soul” certain “gifts” so that one day the soul will share them with the people of the world. These “gifts” are great spiritual truths about the oneness that underlies all multiplicity. So, as the story relates,
> The Lord scooped the Little Soul up into His arms and said, ‘Come with me, Little Soul, and learn how the One becomes the many.’
> Then the Lord splashed into the shimmering stream sending musical waves of light high into the air! He swung onto a great glowing note and off they sailed.

Using the repeating theme of how the “One becomes the many”, the story shows the wondering child how the One Light, the One Sound, the One Creator, the One Power, and the One Love can be seen in every particle of the world, in every soul, and in every faith tradition. In the story the soul repeats each lesson “so it could remember what it had learned and one day share it with the people of the world”.

This would be a lovely book to consider giving to a child. However, any seeker after spirituality might enjoy it, adults included. None of us is too old to be reminded that our presence here on this earth is a gift, that we share this creation with others who are also God’s beloveds, and that God surrounds us all as “a sea of light, made of endless love and peace and nothing more.”

---*
**The Journey of the Soul**

Written and Illustrated by Victoria Jones

Publisher: Radha Soami Satsang Beas, Punjab, India, 2003. Third edition.

ISBN: 81-8256-044-6

It is impossible to explain in human language the origin of the soul, the nature of God, or the manner in which the creation came about. So saints the world over have always resorted to metaphor and parable, using imagery to hint at truths which can only be known through experience.

_The Journey of the Soul_ presents a parable of the love between the soul and God. In simple language and beautiful illustrations, it tells of the soul’s long “journey” from separation from God to joyful reunion. To depict the Lord and the soul, the book adopts a metaphor used by many saints and mystics and presents the Lord as an ocean – a brilliant, shiningocean of love – and the soul as a drop of that ocean. Using language that is universal, this book invites “children everywhere who wonder about God and His creation” to understand life as a journey:
> May every child, of every race and faith, find inspiration in these pages – an insight into our origins, the long journey of life, and the wonderful possibility of finding our way back to our common Home.

In this picture book, the creation is explained as a play in which the Lord wants all the souls to participate. “God has made His play seem very real, so His souls completely forget that they are just actors playing parts.” The narrator counsels: “And whenever a scene is sad or hard, remember you are only playing a part. The real you is your soul, a perfect luminous drop of God Himself, so His love, power and greatness are all within you!” On the stage of the creation each body is a costume which a soul wears. Whether the costume is of a reptile, an insect, a plant or a human, the costume is not the reality.

> With their body costumes on, all the soul-drops look different. But underneath their bodies they are still the same little drops of Light and Love. We all belong to the same family because we all have the same One Father, God, the Great Lord. We should always be kind, gentle and loving to every living being because a soul lives inside each one.

When the book discusses death, a subject that can be disturbing to a young child, the text is reassuring and the illustrations upbeat, showing a smiling soul-drop rising up out of a dead lady bug, radiant in its joyful release. For the child reader who feels abandoned by God or confused by the things going on in his life, the narrator offers encouragement in a warm and sympathetic voice:

> Talk to God. Feel Him shining inside you, loving you and giving you all the strength you need to play the part He gave you, courageously and well. This is called faith in God. If you will always remember
> Him and have faith in Him, you will be happy inside yourself, no matter what happens in his play of “Life”.

The narrator also explains the feeling of loneliness or emptiness a child may have, perhaps without being able to identify it.

> When the Lord wants one of His souls to come back Home, He makes that person feel lonely deep inside, like something is missing. This is the Great Lord’s special way of reminding the soul that its Real Home is not in this world, but back in the Ocean of Light.

The final section of the book describes how the Lord sends His “Great Power” to guide yearning souls on the journey Home. Dazzling illustrations invite the child reader to stretch the imagination to realities beyond the scope of the physical world. Initiation is shown as the touch of the Master’s soul to the disciple’s; the tisra til is shown as a door in the forehead which opens to reveal a hidden path leading into “an amazing new world” where the Master’s Radiant Form “is made of nothing … but the Stream of Sound and Light!” The Master leads the soul through “many marvellous and magical lands” and finally, “lifts the soul-drop back up into the Ocean of Light.”

_The Journey of the Soul_ offers children of all ages a story that may seem as fantastic as any fairy tale, and yet addresses the deepest questions that can trouble a child’s mind: Who am I? What is death? Why do I feel lonely? What is the purpose of life? As the opening page of the book says, “May this story take you on a journey of exploration; a discovery of truth in all its simple wonder and delight.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## An Invocation

> Come, pray, come, O Lord of mine; I await Thee, I long and pine.
> Oh come to my mansion, come, I pray, I stand with eyes glued on thy way. I’ll shed with the coming of the morn
> All fineries that now me adorn. On the path of life, forlorn I stand,
> For Satguru to come and hold my hand.
> I hold a goblet of love for thee; Oh come, my Master, hearken to me. The Saint is my life, my soul is he; He pervades within, he dwells in me.
> In my every pore does he reside, As does rain in the clouds abide. My soul is attuned to name divine;
> Oh come, pray come, dear Lord of mine.
> Mira is the Lord’s beloved now, And, O Lord, her only love art Thou. Mighty Lord, to Mira in Thy grace Hasten to grant a glimpse of Thy face. My attention in Nij Nam does stay;
> Come, dear Lord of mine, oh come, I pray. Come, I beseech Thee, O Lord of mine; Come, I await Thee, I long and pine.
> <sub>_Mira Bai, The Divine Lover_</sub>

<sub>March 2011 3</sub>

## The Ideal of Service

> My Lord, I would rather be a disciple than a Preceptor. I would rather be a humble servant than a Master.
> I care not whether I possess worldly knowledge, so long as I am blessed with spiritual knowledge.
> I would not hanker after the material things of life if you confer upon me peace and contentment.
> I care not whether I have a conveyance so long as I have the gift of a pair of strong and sturdy legs.
> If you give me good appetite,
> I care not whether my meal is sumptuous.
> Give me the power to enjoy good sleep even if my bed be not comfortable.
> I do not care for the worldly applause, but I esteem your approbation more than anything in the world.

The prayer above appears at the beginning of the first volume of the diary of Rai Sahib Munshi Ram, published by RSSB in English as _With the Three Masters._

Rai Sahib had served from 1942 to 1956 as Secretary to three successive Masters. He had been an important man in the legal profession, having been District and Sessions Judge for the Punjab before his retirement to the Dera. He was in a position to enjoy status and respect and all the accompanying benefits. But this endearing prayer holds our attention because of its insistence on a very different set of values. He is overflowing with gratitude for the opportunity to be a lowly servant – without ‘worldly knowledge’, without ‘the material things of life’, without ‘worldly applause’ but with the protection and favour of a true Master.

This simple philosophy is almost a blueprint for a sevadar’s life.

**Becoming Sevadars**
When a group of sevadars were together recently someone asked, “How does one become a full-time sevadar?” It would be easy to get side-tracked by possible answers involving a number of actions, perhaps winding up various external responsibilities, putting one’s finances in order, being approved by the Dera and so on. But that would be forgetting that, most importantly, seva is the Master’s gift. And secondly, that this gift is there for all of us, all the time. Maybe the answer should be, “In the same way as one meditates – by just doing it.”

Because here’s the thing: seva is not reserved for those with time or money or no commitments. Everybody can be a “full-time” sevadar
-why not? We are all full-time sevadars if everything that we do, we do as if it were for our Master. It may be going to work for the wage that supports us; it may be caring for our family. Becoming a sevadar is something that happens through the heart, by putting a set of values into place and sticking to them. It is not primarily brought about through external circumstances.

It’s true that there is a difference between actions which have the physical purpose of looking after ourselves and our family, and actions which have the purpose of serving the Master and his sangat. These latter are what we usually call seva. But ultimately seva is identified by that golden thread of inner intention and dedication.

So, a sevadar given a particular position, perhaps to help look after a property, will have his letter of appointment in his pocket, but the real story of how he got there began long ago when he became a sevadar in spirit – and that is always full-time.

**Living the Life**
When we want to know more about physical seva and what it entails, we can’t do better than to look at Rai Sahib’s prayer, so deceptively simple on the surface but offering such deep meaning. Having been a member of the judiciary, Rai Sahib had known what it was to be a

‘preceptor’ or someone who gives precepts or orders. Yet he preferred to turn his back on this privilege in favour of the position of a humble servant who must follow whatever orders are given to him.

We do not need to have been a judge to know what it is to be a preceptor. Most of us are able to be little kings or queens of a tiny domain of one kind or another, even if it is no more than our own backyard or our iPod. Do we really understand what it means to be a servant without such autonomy? There is the story of the king and the slave – the king asked his favourite slave:

“What would you like to eat?” “O king – whatever you give me.” “What will you wear?” “Whatever you choose.”

“Where will you live?” “Wherever you put me.”

“Then what is it that you desire?”

“My Lord, ‘slave’ and ‘desire’ – how can these two ever go together?”

Even our ‘worldly knowledge’, something Rai Sahib is ready to relinquish, feeds a sense of pride in our autonomy. Don’t we love indulging in knowing better than anyone else, even if (or perhaps especially when) we are powerless to put such knowledge into action? Can we give that indulgence up? Can we swallow our pride and accept decisions in which we haven’t been asked to share? Can we carry out orders with a positive and loving spirit? If we hold on to our ‘spiritual knowledge’, i.e. our understanding of Sant Mat and the opportunity to do simran, we’ll be able to answer yes to those questions and we’ll be on the way to performing our physical seva well.

**Practical Choices**
Then there are the material things of life which Rai Sahib prays not to ‘hanker after’. Contentment with simple things is a practical necessity if our energy is to be directed towards the service of the

Master, because we’re not necessarily going to have the resources to spare for the accumulation of material things. Does our ‘conveyance’ i.e. ‘the kind of car’ we drive matter to us? How necessary to us are life’s luxuries? Do we live to eat or eat to live ? Can we put up with occasional discomfort and still keep our balance?

Lastly, and most important of all, whose approval do we seek? All of us have some reference point in life, whether it be another person or a social ‘norm’, and we tend to mould our actions with an eye to how we think we’ll measure up against this yardstick. That’s often why we want material things in the first place – to reinforce our sense of self in the eyes of the world.

If the Master and his teachings become our point of reference, choices become simpler and outward things fall into second place. Making this shift doesn’t imply that we don’t consult the wishes of our family. Recognizing our responsibility for others’ welfare is not the same as seeking ‘worldly applause’. But with the energy that comes from the Master’s grace we can often do both. We can keep our family happy and still have time to serve his sangat.
**An Old Magic**
The world has become more complicated, more sophisticated, than the world in which Rai Sahib lived. The sangat has grown to a size which he might have found unimaginable. Seemingly miraculously, but in reality because of the compassion, foresight and hard work of the present Master, this has not separated the ordinary satsangi from the Master but brought new opportunities for service. In those seva opportunities the relationship between Master and sevadar still has its old simplicity, its old magic. The gratitude of sevadars cannot be expressed better than in the tender last line of Rai Sahib’s prayer, when the writer says to his Master:

> I do not care for the worldly applause, but I esteem your approbation more than anything in the world.

> The resounding of the primal Sound was heard: catching which, I ascended like a spider on its thread....
> To pass through the sunn region,
> I took the support of the sat Shabd, reaching the court of the Guru.
> Absorbed and lost in the love of the true Master, I became entirely oblivious of the world.
> I found the real, essential Sound where the splendour of the nameless being prevails – He who is beyond all name and form.
> <sub>Soami Ji Maharaj, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

## Through the Eyes of a Seeker

As a young seeker who is drawn to the teachings and the path of Sant Mat, I am inclined to write the following article, which hits upon what I feel every sincere seeker is going through. I hope it will reassure these seekers all that they are not alone. And I hope this article will give insight into my personal thoughts and feelings, whilst addressing how one should try to conduct oneself before plunging into the path and getting initiation. My advice will be on the basis of what the past and present Masters have stressed and advised.

I am a beginner on this path. I have not got initiation, but most of my family have. Never have they forced the path on me – they simply took me to satsangs from the time when I was very young. Back then satsang and the teachings seemed to make no sense, and everything that was said usually went in one ear and out the other. It’s only as a young adult that anything remotely ‘spiritual’ seems to have taken hold of me.

Like any other seeker, I feel I am on a spiritual quest which sometimes feels quite daunting. Daunting in the sense that I am unsure if I am truly heading in the right direction. I have been and still am searching into many different belief systems, just to satisfy my mind and compare them to these teachings. At times, I thought maybe this was a wrong way to approach things. Was I abandoning the teachings? Not so, is the answer, as Maharaj Charan Singh so wonderfully states in _Light on Sant Mat_:

> Let me tell you at once that instead of discouraging, we encourage a thorough study and investigation of the various spiritual disciplines, for it is only by impartial, comparative study and investigation of the various teachings that one comes to know the true value of any system.

This great quote gives me so much hope. It makes me feel that it’s all right to be searching into different religions, philosophies and belief systems if my heart feels the need to. We seekers should not feel that this is wrong. In fact, it is quite the opposite – we should do it if we feel the desire to. These sorts of concerns and issues I believe are best dealt with before initiation to give us a strong foundation we can build on, if we decide to become firm followers of this path.

I understand and sympathize that some youthful seekers on the path of Sant Mat, or any other path for that matter, may feel that they are under pressure to adopt a particular path. Perhaps, for some seekers, their family members are following this path and therefore they may feel compelled to do so as well.

Others may be feeling pressure from friends and are only pursuing the path in order to fit in and not feel left out. Or lastly, to those who might be similar to me, perhaps you are putting a little pressure on yourself about where you stand on the path. For instance, I occasionally feel time is passing by and I still have not moved forward in my mind and am still contemplating on certain things. Should I get initiation? Is this path for me, and do I really want to pursue it and make it a part of my life? These are just some of the questions that I ask myself.

Nonetheless, it is in these specific moments that I take great comfort in what the present Master often says. He frequently reminds us seekers that we should be comfortable with the path we choose to follow, and that he does not want disciples to have blind faith. This advice always strongly resounds in my mind.

Therefore, we seekers should open our hearts and ask ourselves ‘am I heading into this path for the right reasons?’ We need to be patient until our hearts reveal the answer.

So, to all seekers reading who may also be unclear about whether they should follow the path, please don’t despair. We can take refuge in the words of Maharaj Charan Singh in _Quest for Light:_

> This path is not to be followed just … because someone known to you is on it. You yourself must understand the science thoroughly and see what it is, what it expects of you, and what it has to offer.

> The urge to follow this path is to come from within you. No other person can tell you if you are fit to follow the path or not. Your own heart must speak.

> Everything comes at the proper time. Please do not be in a hurry to receive Initiation. Have no worry. First get yourself fully satisfied mentally. Your questions and doubts are quite genuine.

And again in _Light on Sant Mat_ he says:

> It is perfectly correct for you to make sure that you really want to tread this path.… Even if you spent half your life in investigating the truths and possibilities of Sant Mat, I would not be sorry. I would even add that you will get credit for any honest and sincere inquiry.

As seekers, we may ask ourselves what practical steps we can take to develop a deeper understanding of the path. In _Quest for Light_

Maharaj Charan Singh gives us some beautiful advice that I feel we should try to take on board:

> The right thing for you to do at this stage is to read and study books on this science and try to understand the teachings fully. This understanding of the subject is very important and the time spent in this endeavour is well utilized. Try to live up to the principles of Sant Mat. Effort can and should be made to mould your life according to the teachings of the saints.

And in _Die To Live_ he says about seekers:

> They should try to understand the philosophy thoroughly and make a full investigation, and once they’re convinced about the path, then they should try to follow the path.

All the above advice is so positive and practical. If we are enthusiastic to follow this path, we can get a great head start by understanding what the key principles are. We can then try to apply all that we read and understand to every aspect of our daily life. For example, we can follow the lacto-vegetarian diet, refrain from alcohol, attend satsang and generally be a good person. As seekers, we have the opportunity to mould our life in accordance with the teachings of the saints right here and now. So why not try to begin.

The personal and private journey to discover one’s spiritual path is not easy and straightforward. In this period we seekers should try to be positive, patient and be brave enough to ask ourselves tough questions. This, I firmly believe, will eventually lead us to the place and path where we are meant to be.
> Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
> For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.
> <sub>Bible, Matthew 7:7–8</sub>

> What we look for beyond seeing, and call the unseen;
> Listen for beyond hearing, and call the unheard; Grasp for beyond reaching, and call the withheld –
> Merge, beyond understanding, in a oneness which does not merely rise and give light, does not merely set and leave darkness –
_But forever sends forth a succession of living things as mysterious as the unbegotten existence (Wu) to which they return._
> <sub>Lao Tzu, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

## Our True Value

An auction was being held and one lot was an old violin. The wood was stained, the strings were slack and the bow was un-tensioned. It looked pretty worthless. The auctioneer had to drop the suggested first bid price to £25 to get anyone to take an interest. A few dealers made some desultory bids and the violin was about to be sold for a knock down price of £45 when a man got up, walked to the front and took the violin from the auctioneer. This was unusual and the crowd stirred. The man spent a few moments to re-tension the strings and then started to play. He produced the most beautiful and captivating music from the violin for about a minute, then gave the instrument back to the auctioneer and sat down. The bidding re-commenced and finally closed at £2,000.

The dealers were amazed and later asked the purchaser why he paid so much for it. He replied simply that he realized its true worth in the hands of the musician.

From a spiritual standpoint we may view ourselves as shabby and grubby, however the Master can see our true essence. He sees our inner spark, the Shabd. For our part if, like the old violin, we are fortunate enough to be in the hands of a Master, we will be re-tuned and hear the most beautiful music. This re-tuning is attending to our meditation with all the love and devotion we can muster. Once we are able to still our minds through meditation, we will experience the Shabd within us and appreciate our true value.

> Come faqirs, let us go to the fairground, and hear the Music of the mystics;
> Listen there to the unstruck Word of many colours, and cast away the saffron robes of the ascetic. The unstruck Music brings only oneness, and knows no enmity.
> It comes from the opening in the head…. You must still your mind in that Music.
> <sub>Bulleh Shah, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

> He who closes his nine doors and restrains his wandering mind, Obtains an abode in the Lord’s own tenth home.
> There, the unstruck Music plays day and night:
> Through the Guru’s instruction, this celestial Strain is heard.
> <sub>Guru Amardas, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

> Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:
> For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

<sub>Bible, Matthew 6:19-21</sub>

## Letters on Spirituality

The following are excerpts from letters written in reply to seekers and disciples by Maharaj Charan Singh, taken from the book, _Light on Sant Mat_. Please note that the numbering follows the letter numbers in the book.

**2. Our aim is to achieve God-realization by going in and drawing our consciousness up, through mystic practice and discipline, to the centre behind the two eyes, but without interrupting our daily duties. We are to live in the world, but in a detached manner. The Shabd, the Divine Melody, is the link between man and God, and the Guru or the Master simply gives you the technique and joins you to the Shabd.**

**8. A Master not only guides the student in this physical world, but also instructs, advises and helps the disciple on the inner planes when the disciple is able to go in. Our aim should be to realize God or Truth within ourselves, but we must know the technique first, as to how and where to go in. These instructions are imparted to the applicant either personally by the Master or through one of his representatives.**
The real awakening which you are seeking comes not by sending the attention to the solar plexus but by concentrating it at the centre between the two eyes. It is not the eyes which are to concentrate, but the attention of the mind which is to do the work. It is from this centre that our real spiritual journey begins. At present our soul and mind currents are scattered throughout the body. We have to learn to draw them up and to concentrate them at the eye centre. This does not in any way interfere with the normal routine of one’s life, nor is it necessary or even advisable to give up one’s profession or home. Our worldly duties and obligations are to be fulfilled along with the spiritual practice. But one has to take a vow to live on a vegetarian diet and to eschew alcoholic drinks. The prescribed diet includes all vegetables, fruits, cheese and milk.

You realize your own true form when you rise above mind and matter. The soul is encased in three bodies – the physical, the astral and the causal – and only when we have been able to detach ourselves from these three bodies can we realize our true form. All that is required is to work at the spiritual practice according to directions, for a minimum of two and a half hours daily. If you persist in this with faith and devotion, within a few months or even a few weeks, you can feel that you are making progress. But the actual goal is reached after a very long time, depending upon the previous background and the amount of effort put forth in individual cases. The grace of the Master, which is very necessary, is of course there all the time.

You will be happy to know that in this science you do not need to study philosophy or to do any reading unless it be to satisfy your own mind. What is needed is all the _practice_ you can put in. I may add that the first step for initiation is to go on a strictly vegetarian diet. Try this for a few months and see if you can conveniently follow it. I would also advise you to thoroughly study Sant Mat literature to enable you to make up your mind that this is really what you want, and thrash out any questions that you may have, before applying for initiation through the representative. You may write to me whenever you feel like it.

**12. It must have been quite a shock to you to learn of the sudden death of your mother. Souls come and go. This world is like a river and we are like logs floating in it. A current in the river brings us together**
-some for a long time and some for a brief meeting – and another current in the same river parts us. Of course, the closer the association, the sadder the parting. But at its best it is only a worldly relationship. The soul never dies. Please accept my sympathy in your bereavement. I hope that God will give you strength to bear it and to realize that all life in this world is transitory. We come here for experience and with a definite purpose, and when that is finished, we go.

Your travels and experiences give you a good opportunity to study comparative religion first hand. I think that all religions point to the same fact, namely, that everything is within and that we must search within ourselves. Every religion teaches that there is a God and that we have a soul. And that the soul is a part of Him. The very word _religion_ means that relationship of the soul with God. We have been born as human beings to know God, to love Him and to serve Him. We know that God is omnipresent, yet we can find Him only within ourselves.

That each individual has to do for himself – of course, under the guidance of one who has himself attained God-realization.

**31. It is the nature of the mind to be flitting from place to place, to create doubts and difficulties and then occasionally sit down to solve them, thus keeping you involved in a more or less useless activity. The proper thing is to draw up the mind by concentration and hold it at the eye centre as long as possible. There alone is peace. Below that is only strife and discord.**
We are accustomed to pick out faults in other people. But this is not the way of spiritually inclined people. A satsangi or anyone keen on spiritual progress should try to find out his own faults and endeavour to give them up, one after the other, rather than find faults in other people. It is only a sense of superiority and of being above others that induces this habit in us, which is the very opposite of humility.

As for free will, it is an old controversy. The best and most satisfactory solution and the one which brings an element of certainty with it, comes when one goes in and sees the workings of karma. We seem to have a free will but it is hedged in by so many circumstances that there is really very little of it after all, and it is no exaggeration to say that we are puppets in the hands of the Power that rules the world, that is, as long as we have not come to the Satguru and Nam. It is also to be remembered that what we call fate or destiny is not something which has been imposed on us by some outside power against our will, but is the natural result of what we have done in the past. We must reap what we have sown.

As concentration improves and withdrawal is more complete, the ringing of the bells will become clearer. Laziness should be avoided at all costs, for it cuts at the root of meditation.

**43. Please do not mind the fact that you live so far from the Dera. The real Satguru is the Shabd, and when the surat goes into Shabd, we not only meet him but become one with him.**

**107. According to Sant Mat we have to turn our attention inside and gradually weaken our love for external things. The course of simran or the repetition of the five holy names, with attention at the eye centre, is very necessary as it is only with the help of simran that our attention currents are turned inwards.**
The mystic vision, the love, the Shabd are all there inside and have always been there, but we have to go in to contact them. This also evokes His blessings and love. The first part – the simran – which enables us to come to the eye centre, has to be done with effort. Then the fountain of love and grace will begin to flow. I am not angry or displeased, but you have to work your way up. Faith is a good thing, but it must be turned into a living faith.

**286. Master is within all of us and hears our cries and prayers, but we should pray to be granted strength to face calmly what is in store for us, and to enable us to keep our attention in simran and bhajan. You can refer your problems either in meditation or in a letter to me, just as it suits and pleases you.…**
Probably you are putting too much strain on the eyes in trying to see within. This should not be. You do not see inside with these eyes. Please adopt the posture which is convenient and comfortable, and do not put any strain on your eyes. This is the path of slow and steady progress. _Regularity_ is a great thing. Persevere on steadily, without trying to force things or even dwelling upon whether all the karmas can be wiped out in this life. This is the Master’s responsibility. He will do what is proper and correct. The disciple should carry on the meditation according to instructions and leave the rest to Him.

> After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven:
> And the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, which said, “Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter.” And immediately I was in the spirit.
> <sub>Bible, Book of Revelation 4:1-2</sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>March 2011 21</sub>

## Our Life Support System

Time and again we have heard in spiritual discourses phrases such as _make meditation the most important thing in our lives_ or _meditation is our life support system._ These fundamentals of Sant Mat that the Master imparts to us during his visits make us realize the lack of attention that we are giving to the path.

If the Master refers to meditation as our life support system, this implies that our lives depend on this. Just as a patient who can’t breathe on his own depends on respiratory machines, the Shabd sustains us in this creation. But _most_ importantly, meditation is the link that allows us to be connected to the creator whilst we enjoy his creation.

The first step is to acknowledge how vital this meditation process is for our existence. In order to realize this, all we have to do is to take a look at our Master. To get to his stage, he too must have made meditation the most important thing in his life. If we want to achieve any goal in life, we must give it priority. If our goal is to get to the top of spirituality, that is, Sach Khand, it is fundamental to give priority to the daily practice of meditation.

The curious thing is that we sometimes think that meditation is something imposed on us as a daily punishment. However, this is a requirement entirely for our benefit, in which we are re-establishing our link with the Lord. Not only does it help us to go back to our home, but it also provides us with the support to live life with peace and stability. The energy derived from the Shabd allows us to ferry across the sea of life without drowning in the waves of our karmas.

This contact that we can make with the Shabd through our daily practice helps us to get to our ultimate goal – to reunite with the divine. This was the reason that we came on to the path. This was the reason we wanted to dedicate our life to the spiritual practice.

Let us now do some self-analysis. Do we still want to attain that objective? If we do, are our actions in accordance with what our aim is? If we wish to be a pianist, we must give regular time to practise playing the piano. If we waste time in other activities and do not practise playing the piano, then our actions defeat our goal. The same can be applied to the practice of meditation. We can’t fool ourselves into believing that we are serious on the path without doing what we are asked to do.

Our link on the path is the Master – he is our contact. In the outside world we look for contacts that can help our jobs to be carried out efficiently. We, lucky souls, have an inner contact who does not require anything other than our meditation. And that too so that we can be successful in what we chose as our goal. We just have to make him happy by carrying out our task in the best possible way. That is making meditation the _most_ important thing in our lives, and by moulding our lives in accordance with this.

So let us stop and contemplate on the lifestyles we are living. Are they reflecting what the Master wants for us or what _we_ want? Are we living according to what society demands from us or following what the

Master expects from us? Let us set our priorities right and recognize that meditation is our life support system; let us make it our top priority and craft our daily engagements according to this so that we can please our Master, experience the Shabd within and reach our goal.

## Feeling Funny

A keen, young disciple called Fred Had problems in leaving his bed

When he went to extremes By mechanical means

He was, sadly, tossed out on his head.

The stars that he saw made him shout “I have reached the first region – no doubt!”

But his Guru said, “Fred, It’s good luck you’re not dead,

Do your simran, that’s what it’s about.”

## Attitude Conundrum

How often do we turn around and question the Lord, “Why me?”

In times of sorrow, it’s almost like an instant reaction. We may be experiencing physical pain, relationship problems or a financial crisis. Whatever it may be, we’re always quick to whine.

Have we ever thought what our beloved Master must be going through having to listen to everyone’s complaints?

We may have been on the path for years, attending satsang and participating in seva regularly, but in times of pain or suffering, just when we’re supposed to put into practice what we hear, we may lose our balance. We seem to forget our Sant Mat basics and become consumed by our circumstances.

The answer to our complaints, as we know, lies in the inexorable law of karma. We know perfectly well that as we sow, so shall we reap. Perhaps due to the fact that the reaction tends to follow the action with a certain lag, possibly after many lives, we don’t perceive it as a direct consequence of something we’ve done. Regardless, everything we receive is according to our own doings. Blaming fate or protesting to the Lord about it being unfair will not change this.

Thankfully, we have a very powerful tool which can help us combat these situations: our own attitude. As Baba Ji has often emphasized, we must cultivate a positive attitude. Let’s look at this logically. Our life is like a mathematical equation we have to solve. We can only solve this equation using the parameters and factors we have been given.

Whilst most of the factors in our lives are fixed, we can change one of them – our attitude. When we find ourselves going through a tough period in our lives, we have two choices. Either we moan and wail our way through our karma or we accept what we’re given and change ourselves to adjust to that particular situation. In either case we can’t change our karma – we have to go through it. But what we can choose is how we do so.

And, of course, we’ve got to remember that the downs in our lives are temporary phases, which no doubt will pass in time. Life is all about ups and downs. Whether we decide to pass through our low periods happily or crying is up to us. What we must realize is that by not changing our attitude, we’re the ones to suffer. It is a shame that depression and anxiety – symptoms of being unable to adjust to our circumstances – are increasingly frequent in modern society.

The best way to illustrate this attitude conundrum is with the example Maharaj Charan Singh often used to give. He used to relate the alternating seasons, summer and winter, to the ups and downs of our life. Summer has to come, just as the winter must come too. We cannot change the season, but we can always make appropriate preparations. When winter comes, we may obtain warm clothes and arrange for heating to endure it in relative comfort. If we do not adequately prepare, we suffer the cold. We do not say, “Why has winter come?” nor do we refuse to prepare for winter.

In a similar manner, we can change our mental attitude to prepare for and endure challenges in our lives. We can mould ourselves to adjust to those circumstances, which we have to face, which we cannot avoid, and which are already destined.

We can derive a lot of comfort from the knowledge that our karma is administered by our Master. What could be more comforting than that? Who could better manage our destiny than our Master? However, we must realize that the Master can help us only if we allow him to do so. We can’t keep interfering in his work. Let’s try to make things easier for him by placing a little faith in him. When things go the way we want them to, we’re quick to recognize his grace.

But precisely when things aren’t going our way is when we should strengthen that faith. When we feel that pain is coming our way, let’s sit back and say, “Master, you know best, do that which you think is best for me.” Let us be positive and remember that going through our karmas is part of our journey back home to the Lord.

> He who pursues learning will increase every day; He who pursues Tao will decrease every day. He will decrease and continue to decrease, till he comes to non-action;
> By non-action everything can be done.
> <sub>Lao Tzu, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

<sub>• • •</sub>

> Know, O comrade, that your sleep And waking (in this world)
> Is as though a sleeper should dream That he has gone to sleep.
> He thinks, “Now I am asleep,” Unaware that he is really in the second sleep.
> <sub>Rumi, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

## Something To Think About
**Humility**

A man went to Wahab Imri and said: “Teach me humility.”

Wahab answered:
“I cannot do that, because humility is a teacher of itself. It is learnt by means of its practice. If you cannot practise it, you cannot learn it. If you cannot learn it, you do not really want to learn it inwardly at all.”
> <sub>Idries Shah, _Wisdom of the Idiots_</sub>

<sub>• • •</sub>

We should make our hearts the source of love for the entire universe and should have so much humility that even if a person does evil to us, we should return love for the same. In truth, one who is embellished with humility loses the capacity of stinging others. Even if anyone harms him, he does not think evil of him. Sheikh Sa’adi says:

> I am like an ant which is trampled, I am not like a bee which stings.

Egotism or pride is not liked by the Lord. He showers his grace on those whose mind is full of humility and meekness. Water does not gather at the top of hills but flows down and accumulates there. He who bends drinks water, but he who holds his head high remains thirsty.

<sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. III_</sub>

## My Master, My Mentor

If a friend were to ask us who our Master is and why he is important in our lives, what would we respond? What would we say? After all, not all friends are aware of our spiritual beliefs; they might not know much about the path of Sant Mat, and maybe more than one of our friends is an atheist.

How can one explain who the Master is?

Many of us might say he is a friend, someone who is very special to us. Others might say he is a spiritual teacher or a guide. Or we may even say he is family: our father or brother. Who exactly is the Master? What role does he play in our lives?

In a recent face to face with my boss, he referred me to a mentorship programme. He said I had been in the company for many years now and that it was high time I started finding some direction in my career. And who could guide me better than a mentor?

Some of us may work in companies and are aware of this concept. The presentation I attended at work defined what a mentor was, how we can find one and how we can become a mentor ourselves.

In the modern context, a mentor is a trusted friend, counsellor or teacher, usually a more experienced person. Some professions have mentoring programmes in which newcomers are paired with more experienced people, who advise them and serve as examples. A mentor has usually been in the same situations and positions as the mentee and he shares these experiences with his protegee in order to facilitate his job and help him progress.

Initially the mentee has to find a suitable mentor and request him to give his time. Soon a close relationship is established. The mentee develops until he/she learns how to be more and more independent.

Gradually, the relationship comes to that of equals, like a father who trains his son in business and life so that he can eventually run the business by himself.

While I listened to this presentation I simply couldn’t avoid finding similarities and parallels between the corporate world and Sant Mat. Just as the professional mentor guides us in our career development, the Master helps us with our spiritual development. In the great multination of this creation, we are all employees and our guru is the mentor who guides us towards our true home.

Anything we learn in this world, we learn through a teacher who masters that subject. We can take the example of doctors, engineers or lawyers: they have not become experts in their fields only by reading books. They all needed a teacher or a subject matter expert to guide them.

The easiest way to learn any discipline in life is from another person. That’s why saints always remind us that reading books about spirituality and attending satsangs are not enough to obtain God-realization. We need the help of someone with first-hand experience, which only the true living Master has. A Master can make us understand how we can return to God, what it is that keeps us away from him and how we can overcome all these obstacles.

We can refer to him however we want: friend, brother, teacher, guide. These are just physical names. The important thing is that he is the one who inspires us to follow the path and shows us how to walk it. There are so many temptations in life that if it wasn’t for the Master who keeps us on the right track with the Surat Shabd Yoga, we would succumb to them. After all, the company we keep has great influence over us. The good inspire us to be good and the bad influence us with their negativity. This is why saints help us channelize our attention and focus in the right direction. The Master inspires us to be better human beings.

When we want to travel to a foreign country we are not familiar with, we do not depend solely on our intelligence; we consult travel agents and use travel guides. However, the best and most reliable information will only be obtained from someone who has already travelled where we want to go. In the same way, the Master has been to that ‘country’, to Sach Khand. He, like a mentor, has worked in all the departments in the company of life, starting right from the bottom, where we are. He acts as an example to us; if he can do it, so can we.

Our relationship with the Master also evolves and deepens with time and practice, just like the mentormentee relationship. Baba Ji always says that the relationship between Master and disciple starts the minute we place our trust and faith in him. To begin with we may view him as an acquaintance, then as a close friend and role model and then finally as our Master. He is our beloved, but very few fortunate souls realize that he is the personification of the Shabd and that we are a drop of the same divine ocean of love.

The Master, like a mentor, invites us to walk shoulder to shoulder with him. The Master is a mentor who is always available ‘on-line’ for us. We can approach him whenever we want and he will willingly help us. However, just as the role of a mentor is not to do our job for us, but to guide us, the Master too is there to guide us rather than walk the path on our behalf. Ultimately, we must attend to our meditation to reach our goal and become like our mentor, the Master.

It is very hard to describe and explain what the Master means to us. He is the way and the destination, at the same time. He is here in this world mentoring us, but at the same time is connected to the Shabd.

Next time someone asks us that million dollar question, ‘Who is that gentleman?’ perhaps we could say, ‘He is my Master, my mentor’.

## Board, Relax and Enjoy …

**Flight Number: RS 1055**
**Standard Time of Departure (STD): 0300 Flight Destination: Sach Khand Boarding Gate: 10**
**Boarding Time: Passengers are welcome anytime**
**Pilot-In-Command (PIC): Master**
**Baggage Allowance: None**
**En-route Estimated Time (EET): 2 hours 30 minutes**
**Delay: Passenger dependent**

_Attention please, passengers on flight RS Airways 1055 to Sach Khand, please proceed to board through Gate 10. Please make sure you have your boarding cards and passports ready for inspection._

Just imagine what it would be like actually to be on this fictitious flight. In reality, we have our boarding cards in hand for this flight: our meditation! We just have to get up, or rather wake up and board this flight. This announcement is our inner voice, the satsangs, Master and sometimes even friends or relatives, encouraging us to sit in meditation. At the gate is our mind, who will not let us through unless we have all the necessary documents, especially our boarding cards

-our simran. No baggage is permitted on this flight. We must leave behind all our desires, worries and thoughts before boarding.

Flight 1055 is a direct one, straight to Sach Khand. Starting from the tenth door above the eyes, reciting the five holy names given to us at the time of initiation, and listening to the inner sound, we will reach our true home. Ideally we should meditate in the early hours, but it is the only flight where we can board at our convenience. Master accepts us on to his flight at any time of the day.

What better way to fly than with the Master himself? What a tension free flight! Having Master at the flight controls is like having the ‘best’ and without doubt the most experienced captain one could have. He knows our past, and our future and he is the only one who knows what’s truly good for us. And he is the one who will make sure that our journey on this flight is smooth.

Now, there will be turbulence at times in our lives. That is, we will face hard times. We will have to go through our karmas, may get worried and anxious, but we must realize that our captain is doing everything possible to reduce the jerks and bouncy movements. In any case, after a period of turbulence is over, the flight will resume its smooth trajectory.

Now, we all will reach our final destination someday. But how soon we get there will depend on our daily efforts coupled with his grace. The only thing in our hands is our effort, and this will make us more receptive to his ever-present grace. So our flight will land in Sach Khand eventually, but our estimated time of arrival clearly depends on our effort.

Finally if we really want to get to our destination, we must board the flight …

_Ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain welcoming you on board flight RS Airways 1055 straight to Sach Khand. Make sure to fasten your seat belts and stay strapped in during the flight. Please switch off all electronic devices and tune your thoughts to simran. En route weather is pretty good overall, although some turbulence is expected now and then._
_Flight time is two and a half hours, so sit back, relax and enjoy the flight. We are now ready for take off!_

## Seven Steps to Salvation

Music has no language and God is not restricted to any one religion, hence it is often said that inner music is the universal language of God. When in tune, it elevates the conscious state of the soul and creates a conducive environment for it to connect with the spiritual world.

Outer music is based on seven notes, wherever you go. In Indian music the combination of these seven notes of the scale is known as _Sargam_ (similar to Doh, Ray, Me, Fah, Soh, La, Te, Doh in Western culture). Sargam starts at the note Sa (the lowest note) and ascends to Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni (the highest note). Now, as inner music is said to be the language of God, we can look at Sargam from a Sant Mat point of view. The interval between every ascending note is a step that takes us closer to God.

**SA for Satsang**
In music theory, the base note of a chord is the lowest note played forming the fundamental of the chord. Likewise satsang, which literally means association with the divine, forms the foundation of our spiritual quest. Mind is often influenced by the company it keeps. By association with the people of the world, our worldly tendencies will predominate. However, keeping the company of spiritually elevated souls will allow one to become more spiritually inclined. So satsang helps us to touch base with our true inner self, and discover our true objective.

**RE for Rescue**
Moving one step up, the definition of rescue in the dictionary is to ‘set free from danger or imprisonment’. Our ultimate goal is to be rescued from this world of illusion. The question is, how do we get from here to there, from being tangled up in the maze of the mind and senses to becoming one with the Lord and his ocean of bliss?

The first requirement to attain liberation is a human birth. And the importance of human birth comes from the fact that this is the only form in which we can ultimately attain God-realization. This is where grace comes in as, in order to reach our objective, we need to be blessed with a human birth.

**GA for Grace**
There’s a tendency to measure grace by how many of our desires are fulfilled. However the saints explain that grace is anything that pulls us closer to the Lord. So in essence, having got a human birth is nothing but grace and it’s with grace that we realize we are separated from the Lord. Nevertheless, the biggest sign of grace by far is having met a true living Master.

> With nothing in our pocket and the Father with us – this is the best grace we can have from the Father.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, as quoted in _Legacy of Love_</sub>

This takes us to the next step, which is the Master.

**MA for Master**
The Master has been sent here by the Lord to take us from here to there. Maharaj Charan Singh, quoted in _Legacy of Love,_ says:

> To go back to the Father’s house is the main purpose of our coming into this life. All other things we do simply to maintain ourselves in this world. But while doing so, we should not forget the Father who has given us all these things.

The Master does so much for us; it is beyond our comprehension. In the following verse we are reminded of how little we do and how much he does for us:

> If you take one step to take refuge in the Master,
> The Master meets you on the way by taking hundreds of steps. If you remember the Master just once,
> The Master remembers you again and again.
> Even if your devotion is as small as a fragment of a cowrie shell, The Master showers all benefits on you.
> The Master is all merciful,
> His praise is beyond understanding;
> I bow again and again to the one and incomprehensible Master.
> <sub>Bhai Gurdas, as quoted in _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. III_</sub>

We should feel lucky that we have a Master who takes such good care of us; the least we can do is express our gratitude through prayer, and take that step closer to him.

**PA for Prayer**
Prayer is universal. From the beginning of time, people have been praying. However, rather than remembering the Lord, our prayers usually are restricted to asking for worldly help. Maharaj Charan Singh used to illustrate this point by saying that we are beggars at the door of the Lord, that the Lord is a very good giver but we are very poor beggars; the Lord has nothing but jewels to give us, but instead we ask for worthless stones. This kind of prayer will not take us to the Lord – a different kind of prayer is needed:

> Never pray for any mortal thing … I vow I will not pray to God for gifts nor worship him because of gifts bestowed, but I will entreat him to make me worthy to receive, and worship him for being of the essence and of the nature that must give.
> <sub>_Meister Eckhart,_edited by Ursula Fleming</sub>

Real prayer, then, is anything that reminds us of the Lord. Every religion has some holy word: God, Ram, Christ or any other word with which devotees can remember God. Likewise, we go to our Master. He gives us the five holy names to repeat, which is our simran, and thus these words become sweet to us. They become supercharged because they remind us of the person who has shared them with us. Simran creates a magnetic attraction between us and the Radiant Form of the Master. It creates a yearning to be with the Master all the time.

**DHA for Darshan**
Darshan is the helpless gazing at the Master by the disciple and can be of two types – outer and inner. When we look at the physical form of the Master we are not able to take our eyes off him, because we are in love with him. However, as Maharaj Charan Singh says in _The Master Answers,_ “The real darshan is inside. Everyone has to work for that.

The outside darshan is good, but then we have to take a practical view.” On another occasion, when Maharaj Charan Singh was asked by a foreign disciple to go with him on his return back home, he replied with characteristic humour:
> You want to abduct me to the United States? There’s a lot of checking at the immigration department. They won’t allow me like that. So you have to conceal me in such a place that nobody knows you are taking me.
> <sub>As quoted in _Legacy of Love_</sub>

A lot of importance is given to inner darshan because it is the darshan of the Master that will help to take us to true liberation, to the state where we will be free from all suffering.

**NI for Nirvana**
The word literally means ‘blowing out’ – referring, in the Buddhist context, to the blowing out of the fires of greed, hatred, and delusion, being free from suffering, as nirvana means the union with the Supreme Being. In _The Master Answers,_ Maharaj Charan Singh, when asked about the state of nirvana, said:

> Nirvana means release from birth and death, salvation. God-realization or salvation are different terms to explain the same thing.

Salvation or God-realization, which started off as our goal, is the highest note on our Sargam ladder. It is union with the Lord. Some of us are just embarking and some are already on this musical journey. What we must always remember is that the Master is with us at every step to help us merge with the divine power.

## The Divine Weaver

This article is based on a beautiful, anonymous Christian poem called “The Divine Weaver”.

> Man’s life is laid in a loom of time To a pattern he does not see.
> While the Weaver works and the shuttles fly till the end of eternity.

Here the poet uses the analogy of God as the Divine Weaver, who weaves the tapestry of our life using the loom of time.

We do not know the pattern of our life. It is the Lord who has delicately designed our life according to our very own individual karmas. The Lord works behind the scenes in order to liberate our soul and return it to our ultimate eternal home, the divine ocean of love.

> Some shuttles are filled with silver thread And some with threads of gold;
> While often but the darker hue Is all that they may hold.
> But the weaver watches with skilful eye Each shuttle fly to and fro,
> And sees the pattern so deftly wrought As the loom works sure and slow.

Some threads are made of silver and some of gold. Here he explains that in the tapestry of our life, there is a mixture of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ karmas. This world is one of duality; we see it in night and day, positive and negative, happy and sad times, health and ill-health, wealth and poverty, and yin and yang. Often we find ourselves being tossed physically, emotionally, mentally from pillar to post by our karmas. It is easy to lose our balance and this makes our search for inner peace all the more important.

In _Divine Light_ Maharaj Charan Singh writes:

> All our pains are due to our evil karmas in past lives, the consequences of which we are bearing now. And whatever moments we have of pleasure are due to our good karmas.

He goes on to explain, “Everyone has his own individual karmas, the account for which he is settling in this world.”

The poet further explains that the Lord carefully weaves our karmas surely and slowly. It is all under his ‘skilful eye’. This is most reassuring to us, knowing that he is aware of all and is keeping a watchful eye on us. That watchful eye is the divine protection, the comfort, the shoulder to lean on, the guidance, the refuge and, above all, the love he has for us.

Our work is to create that awareness of the divine in all our day-to-day interactions. It is up to us also to be weavers – to weave his name into our lives. This is best done with meditation.

> God surely planned that pattern Each thread – the dark and the fair – Was chosen by his master skill
> And placed in the web with care. He only knows the beauty
> And guides the shuttles which hold The threads so unattractive,
> As well as the threads of gold.

It is beautifully explained in these lines that our lives are planned in the smallest detail by our beloved Lord. He is aware of the mixture of karmas we must go through and the journey we shall follow to reach him. He recognizes the beauty of the ‘pattern’ or combination of circumstances, as this is required for our soul to find its true home.

Here the poet also re-emphasizes the ‘unattractive threads’ as well as the ‘gold threads’. The dark threads symbolize the tough or unhappy times we may have to go through. Yet it is within these times that our searching and yearning for the Lord is paramount. Times of poverty, pain, ill-health, loss of a loved one, are all regarded by sages as boons from the Lord. They keep our mind engaged with God and prayer.

This important point is made in this extract from _The Prophet_ by Kahlil Gibran where he says:

> Your pain is the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding.
> Even as the stone of the fruit must break, that its heart may stand in the sun, so must you know pain.

> The Divine Weaver ends as follows:

> Not till the loom is silent And the shuttles cease to fly Shall God unroll the pattern And explain the reason why.
> The dark threads are as needful In the weaver’s skilful hand,
> As the threads of gold and silver In the pattern he had planned.

The writer then emphasizes that it is only when the loom is silent and death occurs that the Lord unrolls this tapestry of our life and reveals and explains all to us. We then come to learn that the seemingly dark periods in our life were all held together by the most beautiful threads of silver and gold.

These gold and silver threads are not only symbolic of ‘good times’ in our life but also symbolic of God’s grace and his hand in everything.

Our work is to remember that this life is God’s divine design, in which we can complete our journey back to him. Meditation, satsang, seva and positive thinking are tools in our hands which will enable us to keep that objective in front of us. These help us view the bigger picture in our life and identify what our goals and values should be.

We need to be conscious of God all around us and within us. This is done by cultivating inner peace through our meditation, which then comes to serve us as our inner refuge and shelter. This inner anchorage enables us to cope with our day-to-day karmas – the dark threads and gold threads. Our lives then become woven with light and love.

> Poison and nectar are both found within, but only a rare one knows it.
> Those who took the poison, died;
> Those who drank the draught of Immortality became immortal.
> <sub>Dadu, as quoted in _A Treasurey of Mystic Terms_</sub>

## Sorry, I Have No Time!

“Sorry, I have no time”: this is probably one of the most common phrases of today’s time. We live in an age where almost everything is instant. One can do almost anything by just clicking some buttons, from making coffee and food, to mailing, shopping and booking tickets. Man has worked hard to save time, with remarkable technological advances. Modern machinery can definitely make life easier but cannot add hours to our day. We will always have a maximum of twenty-four hours each day. Technology can save us time; we can do a lot more with our days. Today we can do so much more than we could in the past, but the question is, do we?

In the past we complained and today we still complain that despite all of these technological advances, we have even less time. But the fact is the time has always been there and hasn’t changed at all. We had twenty-four hours before and even today we have twenty-four hours. In fact we are at an advantage today as we have the help of all this new equipment to help us with our work and save us all those hours. So if everything is quicker today, why do we still complain? Where has all the so called ‘saved’ time gone?

> Ask anybody and you will find that he has no time. The labourer has no time; the engineer has no time; the doctor has no time; the industrialist has no time. Who has time to relax? Who has some moments of leisure? No one.
> What then have we gained from all this progress, from all these developments? We cannot find an hour for ourselves, not even half an hour in which to relax.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, as quoted in _Treasure Beyond Measure_</sub>

These words apply to us even today. In this rat race for money, fame and what we think of as success, we are sacrificing ‘living’. Not only do we find that we have no time for all the little things in life, we don’t even make time for the most important aspect of our lives, our meditation. We don’t realize how lucky we are to have been initiated by a perfect living Master. Sant Mat is our path to real success, yet we are not ready to give the necessary time to this practice.

The day we were initiated we made a promise to our Master that we would dedicate at least two and a half hours of our day to meditation. So if we think about it, from that day onwards our days don’t have twenty-four hours anymore, they only have twenty-one and a half hours. Two and a half hours of our day is booked for meditation and we have no right to use that time for worldly pursuits. For these purposes we have 90 percent of the day !

So now we have to re-manage our twenty-one and a half hours of the day to fit in our daily activities. Two and a half hours of the day is pre-booked, for the Master, and is not for our use. This is precious time; it is a daily meeting, a one on one with the Master, which we are most privileged to receive. What would we do if we got a call today saying that Baba Ji is coming tomorrow and we have been given a personal interview with him? Will it even cross our minds to say: “Sorry, I have no time”? No, we would leave everything aside and make time for that interview.

Well, this is an everyday scenario. Luckily for us the call has come, and we are the fortunate ones to be invited by the Master himself. Let’s not let this opportunity go. Let us tell him, “You have all my time.”

## Antidote to Worrying

We worry about children, money, health and almost all other subjects. Sometimes we even worry about worrying!

Over two thousand years ago, Jesus Christ addressed his worried disciples and seekers in the same vein:

> Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?
> <sub><sub>Bible, Matthew 6:26</sub></sub>

> Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
> <sub><sub>Bible, Matthew 6:30</sub></sub>

We fear adverse circumstances and worry before things actually happen. Experience shows that most of the things we worry about never come to pass. Since we do not know our future, how can we prepare for it except to live in the Lord’s will? All the same, the vast majority of the problems are of our own making. Our expectations may be unrealistically high despite our limitations. It is also our tendency not to live in the present moment. We are full of regret about the past and worry about the future. Nothing can now be done about the past and who knows the future? Someone rightly observed, “Yesterday is history and tomorrow is mystery.” Resignation to the supremacy of the Lord’s will helps to moderate and mould our thinking so that we can come to terms with the events of life without losing our balance. In this connection, Maharaj Charan Singh says in _Divine Light:_

> There is no use worrying about the past. Take care of the future now. Ups and downs do come in the life of everybody, but one should not lose heart. The Lord is within you and He is ever merciful. Turn to Him and He will shower his grace. Attend to your meditation most regularly, with love and faith. Whether your mind likes it or not, look upon it as your paramount duty.

Answering a letter to a person worried about his financial position, Maharaj Charan Singh in _Divine Light_ advises:

> I am sorry to hear of your deteriorated financial condition. But a satsangi should never allow such things to weigh upon his heart. Please do not fall prey to worry. Worry never did help anyone and it never will. Rather, it puts one in a still more negative condition and depletes one’s energy. You will get what is in your destiny, but you must work for it. No one has ever received more than his share, nor can one receive it before it is due; so why fret and worry? Apply that energy to some practical work, with the proper mental attitude. Real happiness and peace are within you, and not in outer objects. So, do your duty in this world and do not fail to carry on your bhajan and simran regularly, every day.

As disciples, treading the path of Sant Mat, there is only one thing that we should rightly worry about and that is the lack of regularity and effort in our daily meditation. Everything else is secondary. Due to our unclear thinking and lack of resolve, we are tied down with the dead weight of worry upon our heart, preventing our attention from rising to the eye centre. Without a doubt, life on this plane can be tough and that is why the gracious Master wants us to lay our worries aside and focus on experiencing the Shabd within. He has equipped us with the necessary means to fight the mind and gain mastery over it. Drawing from the army tradition, the following song was popular amongst soldiers during World War I:

> Pack up your troubles in your old kit bag, And smile, smile, smile.
> What’s the use of worrying, It never was worthwhile.
> So pack up your troubles in your old kit bag, And smile, smile, smile.
> <sub>George Henry Powell</sub>

> Without cymbals, without drums, The anhad jhankar is present everywhere.
> Without a tune, without a sound, without a pause, The melody resounds, filling every pore of my body.
> <sub>Mira Bai, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

## Book Review

**Pray without Ceasing: The Way of Invocation in World Religions**

Edited by Patrick Laude

Publisher: World Wisdom Books, 2006. ISBN: 1-933316-14-4

This book, edited by Patrick Laude, is an anthology of writings from many religious traditions on “ceaseless prayer.” Laude explains ceaseless prayer as “the methodical, trusting, and virtually – or actually
-
permanent invocation of a divine name or a sacred formula.” The expression “to pray without ceasing” comes from the writings of Eastern Orthodox Christian mystics in _The Philokalia_. This practice is known in other traditions by various names, including _japa_ (repetition), _dhikr_ (mention, remembrance), invocation, and centering prayer.

By presenting writings from Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism Native American and other traditions, Laude shows the universality of ceaseless prayer. The selections range from excerpts from ancient scriptures, such as the Bhagavad Gita, to passages by medieval Kabbalists and modern spiritual leaders.
> Therefore, at all times
> Meditate on Me (or: Remember Me) With your mind and intellect
> Fixed on Me.
> In this way, you shall surely come To Me.
> <sub>_Bhagavad Gita_</sub>

> Remember God and God’s love constantly. Let your thought not be separated from God … so that by means of such continuous contemplation you attain incessantly the world that is coming, and so that God be with you always, in this life and the next.
> <sub>Rabbi Isaac of Akko (1250-1350)</sub>

> Each repetition carries you nearer and nearer to God. This is a concrete fact and I may tell you that you are talking to no theorist, but to one who has experienced what he says every minute of his life, so much so that it is easier for the life to stop than for this incessant process to stop.
> <sub>Mahatma Gandhi (1869-1948)</sub>

The writings come from East and West. They range from scholarly essays to ecstatic personal testimonies. Laude, in his introduction, draws out some of the common threads found in these varied sources. For example, he notes that “the methodical practice of the invocation normally requires an authorization in the form of an induction or initiation into a spiritual rule or contemplative order under the guidance of a spiritual instructor.” He therefore cautions against undertaking this practice on one’s own.

_Pray Without Ceasing_ isdividedintothreeparts. Part One,“Foundational Texts”, provides a sampling of eighteen texts considered by Laude to be classics “that have nourished the spiritual life of generations of faithful.” Here we read the wise counsel of Saint Symeon (949-1022) in The Philokalia, who writes, “To those who have no knowledge of this practice, it is oppressive and laborious… To start with you will find there darkness and an impenetrable density. Later, when you persist and practice this task day and night, you will find, as though miraculously, an unceasing joy.”

Another selection is from _The Way of a Pilgrim_, by an anonymous Russian pilgrim who practiced the repetition so assiduously that it became impossible for him to stop. “I grew so used to my prayer that when I stopped for a single moment, I felt, so to speak, as though something were missing, as though I had lost something.” This sense of missing something drew him back to his repetition. “Early one morning the Prayer woke me up as it were.… My whole desire was fixed upon one thing only – to say the Prayer of Jesus, and as soon as I went on with it I was filled with joy and relief.” A Muslim Sufi, Ibn ‘Ata Allah Al-Iskandari (1259-1309), states that invocation “is a cure for the invoker from every malady and symptom… [It] strengthens the heart and the body, puts inner and outer affairs in order, gladdens the heart and face.” The Indian mystic Kabir celebrates the pain that forces the practitioner to return to the prayer: “All praises to pain: that moment by moment compels us to repeat the Name. The True Name is the only thing to repeat. It is the best gift to make.” Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (1486-1534) speaks of the same pain: “O Lord! Without Thee, a moment of separation hangs upon me like countless ages and my eyes shed tears incessantly while the whole world appears to be a veritable desert, O Govinda.”

Part Two, “Contemporary Doctrinal Essays,” consists of writings by scholars describing the principles underlying invocation. For example, Titus Burckhardt (1908-1984), author of works on metaphysics, psychology, and art, explains:

> The Divine Name … implies a Divine Presence which becomes operative to the extent that the Name takes possession of the mind of him who invokes it. Man cannot concentrate directly on the Infinite, but by concentrating on the symbol of the Infinite attains to the Infinite Itself… Thus union with the Divine Name becomes Union with God Himself.

Marco Pallis (1895-1989) expresses in Buddhist terms the trans-formation of consciousness that results from invocation: “Where that remembrance has been raised to its highest power, there is to be found the Pure Land.” Lev Gillet (1893-1980), who often wrote under the pseudonym “a monk of the Eastern Church,” calls for “loving adoration” while practicing repetition: “Having begun to pronounce the name with loving adoration, all that we have to do is to attach ourselves to it, cling to it, and to repeat it slowly, gently, and quietly.” But, he counsels, “let us not think that an hour during which we have invoked the name without ‘feeling’ anything … has been wasted and unfruitful.” Mir Valiuddin, a professor at Osmania University in Hyderabad, India and author of works on Sufism, emphasizes “alertness of the heart” during the practice of _dhikr_.

Part Three is “Contemporary Testimonies.” These selections, as Laude explains, “suggest the relevance, actuality, and accessibility of this way in the modern world.” Thomas Yellowtail (1903-1993), a priest of the Native American Crow tribe, writes, “I am always praying and thinking of God. I am so used to it that I just can’t stop, and I think that it is the best thing a person can do.” Vandana Mataji – a nun, head of a Christian ashram in Rishikesh, India and the author of _Nama Japa_ – says, “In this age of modernity in everything and weakness of will, generally speaking, _japa_ or the constant taking of the Divine Name may be regarded as the best and perhaps the only means of maintaining a spiritual awareness in one’s daily life.” The Hindu mystic Ramana Maharshi (1879-1950) extols _japa_ or repetition: “_Japa_ uttered even once has its own good effect, whether the individual is aware or not… If you are not aware of the _ajapa_ (unspoken chant) which is eternally going on, you should take to _japa_. _Japa_ is made with an effort.”

This book offers encouragement to seekers of all backgrounds who want to develop a practice of ceaseless remembrance or prayer. Some of the writings may be unfamiliar, dense or challenging, but most are accessible and inspiring. They all point to a mystery: that the invocation of an “utterable” word or expression can, with due guidance, lead to realization of an “unutterable” transcendent reality. Laude concludes that ceaseless prayer “tends to be understood, at its summit, as the very end and essence of the spiritual path, all other practices converging into its synthetic, unifying, and interiorizing power.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## My Companion

> My constant comrade you are; wherever I go, With love you hold my hand and lead me on.
> Your support alone enables me to tread the path of life; You are the one who carries my burden on your shoulders.
> It is you who lends meaning to my foolish blabber; You’ve removed my reserve and made me impudent and bold.
> The whole of mankind has become my guardian; They are all my own relatives, my loved ones.
> The bliss of your company I experience within and without; Tuka now basks in the sunshine of your divine love.
> <sub>_Tukaram, Saint of Maharashtra_</sub>

<sub>April 2011 3</sub>

## The Prayer to Our Father

Most followers of religion use prayer as a personal and emotional form of communication with God. The prayer that Jesus gave his disciples is known as “The Lord’s Prayer” and is probably the best-known of all the Christian prayers.

Around 1943, ancient texts of the early Christian Church were discovered which contain a version of the Lord’s Prayer. Now translated into modern English, it’s called “The Prayer to Our Father”:

> O Thou, from whom the breath of life comes, who fills all realms of sound, light and vibration.
> May Your light be experienced in my utmost holiest. Your Heavenly Domain approaches.
> Let Your will come true – in the universe (all that vibrates) just as on earth (that is material and dense).
> Give us wisdom (understanding, assistance) for our daily need, And detach the fetters of faults that bind us (karma), like we let go the guilt of others.
> Let us not be lost in superficial things (materialism, common temptations), but let us be freed from that which keeps us off from our true purpose.
> From You comes the all-working will, the lively strength to act, the song that beautifies all and renews itself from age to age. Amen.

Let’s look at this translation. Firstly, the prayer acknowledges that God not only gives, but also sustains life. Every breath we take is God-given and keeps us alive. The moment he “withdraws” himself, in the sense of withdrawing our soul from our body, we no longer have the breath of life, and we die.

Spirit is the only self-acting substance in existence, and without it nothing would be able to move or exist. If God withdraws himself from anything, it ceases to exist. God not only gives us life, but he also sustains the material universe and all the astral, causal and spiritual regions. This is confirmed in the second line of the prayer, which refers to the regions or heavens that are mentioned in almost every scripture.

In _Ascension of Isaiah,_ an early Christian work of unknown authorship, there’s a reference to six heavens. Isaiah is quoted as saying:

> And he (the angel) took me up into the air (spiritual space) of the sixth heaven and I beheld a glory I had not seen in the five heavens while I was being taken up ...
> <sub>As quoted in _The Gospel of Jesus_</sub>

Jesus also referred to there being many heavenly regions when he said:

> In my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
> <sub><sub>Bible, John 14:2</sub></sub>

So the prayer acknowledges that God gives and sustains life, and that he fills all heavenly realms with sound, light and vibration

-which are also key elements of Sant Mat. The Shabd or spiritual current, the “breath” of God, is the very essence and life of all things, and is mentioned in all religions. It vibrates within all life and sustains all realms and universes.

This was the sound heard by Mohammed in the cave of Gar-e-Hira. Moses heard this same sound on Mount Sinai, and Christ in the wilderness. Shiva heard it in a cave of the Himalayas.

The flute of Krishna is said to be symbolic of this sound. It is said that those who are able to hear it and meditate upon it are relieved of all worries, anxieties, sorrows and fears.

Musical instruments are widely used in spiritual assemblies because people try to emulate this inner sound. They sing hymns and become enraptured with this outer music. The ringing of bells in churches is meant to suggest the same sacred sound and lead people towards the inner life.The whole world is enchanted with outer music, which simply entertains the mind, while the divine inner music breaks our worldly fetters and we become truly pure by listening to it.

Baba Ji has explained that the silence we hear and the blackness we see when at first we close our eyes are similar to a television set that has not been tuned. During initiation we are taught how to fine-tune our soul’s seeing and hearing faculties until we hear the sound that our soul will recognize as the divine Word of God. This is the sound that will eventually lead our soul to the Radiant Form of the Master within us.

Next, the prayer talks of divine light. This light is also mentioned in most scriptures. In St Matthew, Jesus says:

> The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.
> <sub><sub>Bible, Matthew 6:22</sub></sub>

The single eye or third eye is a metaphor in many religions for the soul’s eye that can see the divine light within us. Again, in _Ascension of Isaiah_ we read:

> And then, when I was in the sixth heaven, I thought that the light which I had seen in the five heavens was darkness. And I rejoiced and gave praise to him who had bestowed such light upon those who await his promise.… And the angel who was accompanying me realized what I was thinking and said: “If you rejoice in this light, how much more will you rejoice in the seventh heaven when you see the light where the Lord is.”
> <sub>As quoted in _The Gospel of Jesus_</sub>

The words in the text “who await his promise” may be encouraging for satsangis who feel that they have made no spiritual progress.

Our waiting will eventually be rewarded with his light. We consider churches, mosques and temples holy places, but in truth our body is the only holy place in which we can witness this divine light.

The prayer then refers to “the Heavenly Domain”. It is said that as the devotee experiences spiritual awakening, he becomes more aware of the presence of the Lord in everything around him. During meditation he now sees the divine light, and hears the sound that will lead him to his spiritual destination – the Heavenly Domain.

The prayer goes on to speak of the Lord’s Will and our surrender; our total acceptance of whatever the Lord wills. The Masters teach that total acceptance only comes when one has reached the fifth spiritual region and has become God-realized. Then the devotee comes to realize that his ego no longer exists and everything is the Lord’s Will. Until then we think we are separate from God and behave as such, but by total surrender to the Master, we rise above the ego and gain everything.

The prayer now asks for the wisdom to know our daily needs. The Master gives us wisdom with the four vows that we take at initiation and through which he guides us to live a compassionate and moral life: correct living for a life dedicated to spirituality. Baba Ji has said that witnessing inner light and hearing sound are not the only proof of spiritual progress. The positive changes that we make in our day-to-day lives by following the four principles are also spiritual progress, which is very encouraging to hear.

But our most important daily need is our meditation, and wisdom is realizing this and acting accordingly. Getting out of bed to meditate when that alarm goes off in the morning is attending to the most important of our daily needs.

If we live in his will and he grants us the wisdom to carry out our daily duties in his name, then our karmic load will gradually be lightened. In the prayer there’s a plea for detachment from the fetters of our faults. A fetter is a chain or shackle, and this refers to the burden of karmas which chain us to this creation lifetime after lifetime.

In order to be truly detached we also have to forgive those who have acted against us. Both our karmic debits and credits keep us from our true home. We have to reap what we sow, good or bad. Without the Master’s grace we are doomed to return again and again to this world in one form or another, paying back and receiving whatever we owe or are owed.

The next few lines of the prayer are a plea to the Lord to give us the strength not to become entangled in the distractions of this material world. Our purpose is to escape this world and return to our true home, which can only be done in the human body. The human body is special because within it is the key to the heavenly door – the door to the spiritual regions. During meditation slowly and gradually the soul and mind gather all their forces at that inner centre and finally leave the physical world entirely by penetrating the inner door. At that moment the soul passes through “gates of light” and enters the inner heavens.

If we don’t meditate and tune in to these higher regions, we will never really get to know what we are. We will never really understand the truth Baba Ji refers to: that we are spiritual beings having a human experience and not human beings having a spiritual experience.

The prayer continues by acknowledging that God’s will gives movement to everything, and that everything is dependent upon God for life. The acknowledgment that from God we receive “the strength to act” means that we would not even be able to move a muscle without God’s will. Our soul, as a drop of God, gives us life. Nothing else can activate us.

The prayer closes by referring to the Shabd as “the song that beautifies all” – that gives life to everything and sustains all creation from age to age, beginning to end. Nothing is created, beautified or renewed without the divine sound. This sound, or Word of God, is the creator, sustainer and destroyer of all the regions, heavens, universes and worlds – and this sound is within us.

In a conversation with Maharaj Sawan Singh, a seeker asked if one should simply leave everything to the will of the Lord and not pray at all? The Great Master spoke in favour of praying:

> Prayer has its own advantages.… It brings humility and removes one’s pride and haughtiness. Bringing one’s helplessness before one’s mind, it tends to make a man devotionally minded, pious and godly. Our whole life should be a life of prayer. It makes us pure-hearted. Only we should not pray for worldly pleasures.
> <sub><sub>_Call of the Great Master_</sub></sub>

## The Way

> The Way is not hard to a simple heart, nor is there any hurdle to upright thoughts, nor any storm in the depths of an enlightened mind. When supported on all sides by the harmonious, then there is no discord within.

> The likeness of that which is below, is that which is above.
> For everything is from above, and whatever is below exists only in the imagination of those who are without knowledge.

> Grace has been revealed for your salvation: have faith, and live and be saved.
> Hallelujah.
> <sub>_The Odes of Solomon_</sub>

> Man seeks the Lord because He is his origin.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Sant Mat_</sub>

## Accepting Responsibility

You know the old question: Why do you always find the thing you are looking for in the last place you look for it? Obviously, because you stop looking when you find it.

As satsangis many of us, perhaps most of us, are still looking for that certain something which still seems to be missing. If we were able to meditate successfully and go inside and converse with the Guru, we would not need to keep searching.

That same force that drew us to this path in the first place is no doubt the same one that is urging us to keep up the search. That force is, of course, the hunger of the soul – the spark of the Divine inside us that is nagging for release from its entrapment here. Somehow most of us have come to realize that we are in the wrong place. And we have also realized that we are entirely responsible for our plight. We must help therefore by taking some responsibility for getting out of here.

What is this path that we follow? This path is a way of living the rest of our lives. We have to do that by paying attention to what we do with our lives from moment to moment.

We have to take responsibility for the results if we don’t take our lifestyle seriously every single moment. Each one of us is personally responsible for every thought, word and deed. There is nobody else we can blame and there are no grey areas.

This way of life is simple in its principles but much more difficult to practise. It is governed by four principles. Firstly we promise our

Master not to eat meat, fish or eggs. In this modern world this is easier said than done. There are so many processed foods and so many foodstuffs and meals prepared by industry and other people that we require extreme vigilance not to break this promise of ours. We have to check all labels and ask lots of questions or, as an alternative, avoid that product.

Just a small example: You have been out with friends at a restaurant for a good meal (vegetarian, of course) and your host has settled the bill with the waiter. He passes you a soft peppermint which came with the bill. You unthinkingly pop it in your mouth and head for the door. Sadly you now have to pay the price of eating animal products in the form of gelatine in the sweet. You neglected to examine the wrapper.

It is precisely the same with our second promise of a life without alcohol or drugs. Don’t think that the occasional glass of wine is harmless. We have been told that, as initiates on this path, we will reap the consequences of wrong decisions in extra measure compared to our fellow man, because we should know better.

Still on the rules for this path, the third promise we made was to live a moral and upright life. This is really a subject of great difficulty and fraught with disagreement. It is indeed a minefield with little hope of getting across without some form of injury.

How should we be dealing with our fellow man in our day-to-day lives?

In _The Book of Mirdad_ the Master tells the Companions:

> So think as if your every thought were to be etched in fire upon the sky for all and everything to see. For so, in truth, it is.
> So speak as if the world entire were but a single ear intent on hearing what you say. And so, in truth, it is.
> So do as if your every deed were to recoil upon your heads. And so, in truth, it does.

In other words, think, speak and do responsibly, because the consequences are your responsibility.

Maharaj Jagat Singh gave this warning:

> Never speak ill of others. It is a great sin … A wound inflicted on the body with a sharp weapon heals up in time, but not so the wound that the tongue inflicts on the heart of a man. Beware of hurting the feelings of any living being.
> <sub><sub>_The Science of the Soul_</sub></sub>

Perhaps a good maxim here would be to watch everything that goes either in or out of our mouths. We can reflect on the message given to us by Baba Ji, when he says we have learned how to “do” but forgotten how to “be”. We all rush around, meeting deadlines and chasing our own tails. We would be better off prioritizing our actions and slowing down. Our ability to live a moral and upright life would be greatly enhanced.

We now come to the most difficult part of this path: to do at least two and a half hours of meditation per day for the rest of our lives. The whole purpose of sitting quietly and doing simran is to get to the eye-centre.

In _Living Meditation_ we’re told:

> We struggle in meditation because our attention is not concentrated in simran; it is thinking about the world. From the moment we were born, the mind has come out of the eye focus and has been working outside. The outward tendency of the mind has become a deep-rooted habit. We have to struggle to reverse this process if we are to concentrate our attention at the eye centre.

We know that our ultimate goal is God-realization. But our first goal has to be reaching the eye-centre – making our mind motionless and collecting our scattered attention at the eye-centre. We read further in _Living Meditation:_

> The fact that it is a more humble goal than the ultimate goal of God-realization doesn’t make it less necessary or any easier.
> To achieve it we will need to concentrate all our attention, love, devotion, energy, intelligence, skill and effort on the task. To reduce and still our thought-waves by means of simran at the eye-centre – this has to become our main concern and challenge in life.

Sadly, here too there are no grey areas. There are no compromises. The responsibility rests with us. If we don’t sit for meditation we will stagnate on this path. We talk glibly about the soul and God and going home. We bandy about terms like “self-realization” and “God-realization”. What do we think we are doing? Aren’t we just fooling ourselves?

We have been born into this creation again and again because of the law of karma. Kal was instructed at the outset to keep souls in the lower realms of creation. No problem. Enter the universal law of cause and effect. Karma is born! It’s so easy – make the individual soul responsible for every action. The system then becomes self-perpetuating, with no hope of escape unless some intervention takes place.

Whatever we do, whether good or bad, has to be paid off. Unfortunately, we have kept creating more karmas than can be handled in a lifetime. We now have a situation where each soul is accumulating karmas at such a rate that they need to be stored in an account which has to be paid in full before the soul can be released from this prison. Sometimes the chains are gold and sometimes the chains are lead. But they all shackle us to our karmas.

Each time the soul is born it is allocated a set of karmas from the vast store in the account. These constitute the destiny of this life. They have to be lived in order for them to be eradicated from the stored account.

This is where responsibility comes in: We created these karmas and only we can erase them. It’s no good trying to blame anyone else for our predicament. The Guru has told us quite emphatically that he takes over the administration of our karmas at the time we are initiated. He has also said that he will not remove our current karmas, but that he will give us the help we need to endure them.

Of course, merely by living we have to interact with the world around us and are therefore performing actions. As we know, that leads to the creation of fresh karmas that will be added to our account. Our responsibility in this regard is to tread lightly and be mindful of our thoughts and actions.

Okay, a lot of words and theories so far. Practically we need to realize that we have to take the responsibility of making the necessary changes to get out of here. We have to follow the Guru’s instructions and in particular we have to meditate as we promised.

We are totally responsible for either success or failure. So, let’s go for it – and enjoy our meditation!

## Love Is Supreme

> All faiths say that love is supreme, and declare it to be higher than the practice of yoga, for love generates detachment, and all renunciation arises from love. From love and devotion arise knowledge, illuminating everything around, and destroying ignorance.
> Rare is love, and very difficult to grasp.
> Love is obtained only when the Lord chooses to bestow it.
> The Lord is bound only by love and devotion, so all the scriptures declare.
> If love awakens in the devotee’s heart, then the Lord remains always nearby and visible.
> Know for certain that love is the crown jewel of all practices, O Charan Das.
> <sub>_Jap Ji_</sub>

> The mesh of illusion is cut asunder And the ocean of life evaporates,
> When one is attuned to the Name of the Lord.
> <sub>_Tukaram, Saint of Maharashtra_</sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>April 2011 17</sub>

## To Everything There Is a Season

> To everything there is a season and a time to every purpose under the heaven: A time to be born, and a time to die;
> A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; A time to kill, and a time to heal;
> A time to break down, and a time to build up; A time to weep, and a time to laugh;
> A time to mourn, and a time to dance;
> A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
> A time to get, and a time to lose;
> A time to keep, and a time to cast away; A time to rend, and a time to sew;
> A time to keep silence, and a time to speak; A time to love, and a time to hate;
> A time of war, and a time of peace.
> <sub>Bible, Ecclesiastes 3:1-8</sub>

> Time changes and will go on changing, but Nam does not change.
> The current of Nam goes on as usual.
> It is Nam which changes the times and brings about all changes.
> <sub>Maharaj Jagat Singh, _The Science of the Soul_</sub>

## Just Please Him

Out of the infinite grace of the Lord we are blessed with the satsang of a true Master who instructs us on how to meditate so that we can reach his inner Radiant Form. We have been in this creation since the very beginning – for so long that even in our wildest imagination we cannot begin to comprehend this time span. We have incarnated into every possible life form, often going through pitiful and heart-rending suffering.

Unknown to us but out of the incredible mercy, compassion and grace of the Master, we have been pulled, prompted and pushed, slowly and slowly, to that astounding moment when we found ourselves in a human form and face to face with him.

Once we have received initiation from the Master, our escape from this vale of tears is assured. In return he asks only that we mould our lives to the teachings and do our daily meditation as instructed. Where could we ever find a better deal than this? So little expenditure – so much profit!

Why then do so many of us seem to have a problem giving full time regularly to meditation? Surely we realize the incredible good luck that has come our way? Finally, after aeons of struggle and out of zillions of souls, we have been selected to go back to the Father and escape the suffering and pain of this creation forever. Why delay? Perhaps because our effort and commitment to meditation is lacking, and, as there are no apparent signs of progress, we have just packed it all in, given up.

Do we really want to be dragged to Sach Khand behind the bulldozer when, as Maharaj Charan Singh tells us in _Quest for Light_:
> Meditation has the power to burn out our karmas of millions of lives.

And as he advises us:

> We should never slacken our efforts. Every moment that you give to meditation takes you nearer to your home and brings the Lord’s Grace upon you.… Please remember that we do not meditate in order to hear this or to see that but just for the love of the Lord and because our Master wants us to do this. We are not concerned with the results. Our duty is to do what we have been asked to do. The credit of meditation is never lost and the reward becomes apparent only at the proper time, known only to the Master.

How wonderful – we have nothing to worry about. The Master will bank and multiply even our smallest efforts. We just have to make that effort. All we have to do is sit quietly and do our simran with our attention at the eye centre, totally relaxed and happy.

Just try it. One gets such a tremendous feeling of relief knowing that he takes responsibility for everything. Our duty is simply to sit and repeat the names at the eye centre and leave the rest to him. What could be easier? Maharaj Charan Singh said that even our strong and sincere desire to meditate is credited to our account.

Come on then, let’s buckle down and do our meditation and please our Master with our loving effort. As Baba Ji says, we can all try harder. If we pause and think about this, we realize it is actually in our power to please our beloved Satguru. Isn’t that an exciting thought?

Our Masters have repeatedly said that it is our meditation that pleases them. For forty years Maharaj Charan Singh begged us to do our meditation, and for the past twenty years Baba Ji has done the same, trying to make us realize the urgency and importance of doing our part. If we have been lacking in this duty, then let us resolve to please him from now on. Surely he deserves our obedience?

Baba Ji was once asked if it was possible to take the atmosphere of love and devotion we experience at Dera back to our home countries. He gave us a beautiful explanation. He said that while we are talking to him we are looking at him and we see him, but if we were turned around, we would no longer see him. If we don’t see him, he hasn’t gone anywhere – it is we who have turned our faces away from him.

Therefore, let us bring his presence into our lives every moment through constant simran – constant remembrance; let us keep our faces turned towards him so that we can feel the divine presence with us every moment of our lives. This will please our Master. Let us do our meditation, giving full time every day, and he will look after the rest. There is no short cut. It is our meditation that will please him.

> Master’s Radiant Form is near your eyes.
> Just lean within and see him.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

## Always Do Your Best

Regardless of the quality, keep doing your best – no more and no less than your best. If you try too hard to do more than your best, you will spend more energy than is needed and in the end your best will not be enough. When you overdo, you deplete your body and go against yourself, and it will take you longer to accomplish your goal. But if you do less than your best, you subject yourself to frustrations, self-judgment, guilt, and regrets.

Just do your best – in any circumstance in your life.

There was a man who wanted to transcend his suffering so he went to a Buddhist temple to find a Master to help him. He went to the Master and asked, “Master, if I meditate four hours a day, how long will it take me to transcend?”

The Master looked at him and said, “If you meditate four hours a day, perhaps you will transcend in ten years.”

Thinking he could do better, the man then said, “Oh, Master, what if I meditated eight hours a day, how long will it take me to transcend?”

The Master looked at him and said, “If you meditate eight hours a day, perhaps you will transcend in twenty years.”
“But why will it take me longer if I meditate more?” the man asked. The Master replied, “You are not here to sacrifice your joy or your life. You are here to live, to be happy, and to love. If you can do your best in two hours of meditation, but you spend eight hours instead, you will only grow tired, miss the point, and you won’t enjoy your life. Do your best, and perhaps you will learn that no matter how long you meditate, you can live, love, and be happy.”
> <sub>Don Miguel Ruiz, _The Four Agreements_</sub>

## Emptiness

> An empty vessel is beautiful because it’s empty. Fill it and you can no longer see the vessel, but rather its functionality. Become empty and you’ll see your own beauty, not merely your functionality.
> <sub>Daniel Levin, _The Zen Book_</sub>

What is emptiness? The dictionary defines it as void, vacant, or a vacuum. We talk of the vast emptiness of space; or we may equate emptiness to a feeling of loneliness – as in “After the Master left I felt a terrible emptiness.”

Usually, we tend to equate emptiness with nothingness. But how can this be true of spiritual emptiness? We are taught that Shabd is everywhere and fills all space with its vibration; therefore emptiness is neither a void nor a vacuum.

When the Masters tell us to empty ourselves they are simply telling us to still the mind, to stop the incessant inner chatter; to drop the emotions, moods, feelings and associations, the constant thought process that is associated with the mind.

Generally we refer to any activity that goes on in our heads as the mind, but all activity – whether movement, sensation or thought – is a function of the brain. The neurons in the brain are chatty little cells that love to talk to one another. They constantly pass messages, in the form of chemical molecules, back and forth to one another across tiny synapses. These molecules are associated with our emotions, such as fear, joy, anxiety, and even with our attention. When these neurons connect they form a strong bond. They pass the same sort of messages back and forth reinforcing this bond, which becomes a habit.

These are the habits Dr Johnson speaks of in _The Path of the Masters_ when he says:

> Habit is the chief method of mental action. Habits are likened to grooves in which actions run. The first thing which mind does, after it is agitated and brought into action, is to establish a groove, which we call habit.… After many repetitions, the mind runs on very smoothly in its grooves and enjoys it.

These habits are built up over a lifetime. Through constant repetition we systematically reinforce our emotions, thinking and beliefs in the neuronal pathways in our brains. Every feeling, action, sensation and emotion is a conditioned reaction we have learnt.

Mental repetition is mainly one of two kinds. Either it is something we want to happen, such as when we focus on our wants, or it is something we don’t want to happen. When we constantly repeat the same thoughts of things we are afraid of, we build a connection of fear in our brains. Similarly, the more we tell ourselves we can’t meditate, the stronger we make the connections between those little neurons and the less likely we will be able to meditate – whereas consistent practice builds a constructive habit that not only weakens old neuronal patterns, but builds strong new patterns.

So, where does the mind fit in to all this? The mind is totally elusive and almost impossible to describe. We can’t identify the mind like aspects of our physical body, yet – because we think, we feel and we experience emotions – neither can we deny its existence. The mind creates our sense of self. It is our consciousness, our awareness.

It is the consciousness we call mind that interprets the activity of the brain – our ability to reflect on our own perceptions. Mind is the inner, personal observant self. It is the background on which the activity of the brain is displayed. Just as the night sky provides a canvas for us to appreciate the beauty of the stars, so the mind provides the canvas of consciousness through which we are aware of the brain’s activity.

We generally refer to this combination of brain activity and awareness as ‘mind’. And to take it a step further, Dr Johnson tells us that Shabd is the motive power of the mind. Every activity in the universe is the result of Shabd working through many intermediate substances.

So the brain provides the functions that enable us to exist in this world. It is our thinking and reasoning powerhouse, while our mind is the consciousness that makes us aware of our actions.

In essence, therefore, the mind is empty. It is a vessel we fill with impressions, and ultimately all we see is its functionality, not its beauty. All our efforts on the spiritual path are simply to develop the ability to ignore the passing show of mental activity and to look to the beauty of the emptiness beyond.

We talk of the vast emptiness of space, yet science tells us that space is anything but empty. Rather it is filled with a limitless number of minute particles that are smaller than an atom and in constant motion. This movement creates the opportunity for anything to be created or dissolved. Similarly, a mind resting in meditation, empty of thoughts and activity, is full of possibility, for anything may appear, transform or simply fade away.

When the Masters speak of emptiness they are not speaking of nothingness but rather of the vast emptiness beyond our thinking, forms and ideas – the awareness of a sense of possibility, a sense that anything can arise, anything can happen.

It is the conscious awareness of this emptiness that we want to embrace, and meditation is the technique we practise to achieve this.

So, how does it work? Well, firstly we have to perfect our simran.
> Simran is used by all the world in one form or another. It simply means concentrating the attention upon one thing, then going over and over it, until it is made a part of the very fibre and substance of one’s being.
> <sub><sub>_The Path of the Masters_</sub></sub>

Repetition occupies the thinking process. If we want to reach the door of the house but the guard dog is on patrol, we throw the dog a bone and walk to the door. Similarly, if we want to experience the emptiness within, we throw simran at the mind, and while it gnaws away at the repetition we have the opportunity to open the door, to stand on the threshold of the vast emptiness beyond.

The power behind consciousness is Shabd, vibrating at different levels of consciousness. Each word in the simran is associated with a particular range of conscious vibration, depending on the inner stage with which it is associated. It therefore has the potential, when used correctly, to alter our own vibration – our own level of consciousness. But the main purpose of simran is simply to focus our consciousness at the eye centre. Any other benefits, whether tangible or subtle, that occur during proper repetition are not the reason we do simran.

Dhyan is an aid to hold our attention at the eye centre, because it is very difficult to hold the attention in that emptiness. Maharaj Charan Singh said that dhyan means thinking about the Master, visualizing his form so that we feel we are in his presence. Simran and dhyan are the way we work with our mind rather than have it work against us.

Meditation is actually a very simple exercise. We complicate it because we become fixated with trying to stop the mind from producing thoughts, which is its natural occupation. We may as well try to stop our heart from beating. Meditation is not a war zone in which we fight the mind. Rather it is a process of resting the mind in its natural state, in which we are simply aware of our existence, thoughts, emotions and sensations. When we don’t attach meaning and emotion to our thoughts, when we don’t engage them, it’s easy to let them go, it’s easy to just let them drift across the emptiness beyond
-and then get back to our simran. We don’t have to be a slave to whatever the mind produces. Rather, the mind should be our friend along an incredible journey, travelled with peace, harmony and joy.

We are neither body nor mind. We are simply destined to assume a particular form and functionality. As long as there is a body we have form. Without the body – we just are: we are formless. Forms are veils – illusions – separating us from emptiness. Even the Master’s physical form is not his true form, which resides in the emptiness of formlessness. In _Legacy of Love_ Maharaj Charan Singh gives us a beautiful message. He says: “May your love of the form culminate in the love of the formless.”

Shabd is the seeming emptiness that remains when all forms, whether spiritual, mental or material, have been discarded. We stand on the threshold of the experience of emptiness, of entering into nothingness, if we would simply allow ourselves to look beyond the mind to the shining essence of our true nature – the beauty of emptiness.

Rumi says: “Out beyond ideas of wrongdoing and right doing there is a field. I will meet you there.”

The real point of meditation is to wait for the Master in Rumi’s field
-to rest in bare awareness, whether he comes or not – just simply to be there. Whatever comes up, just be open and present to it, and let it go. The aim is simply to rest in that vast emptiness – waiting for his radiant light to guide us home.

How much simpler could the process of meditation be?

> Maharaj Sawan Singh
> <sub>28 Spiritual Link</sub>

## The Subversive Mind

Nowadays people are very concerned about terrorism, and as a result of mindless acts of terror, there is increased security everywhere we go. This theme was touched on during a talk at the Dera, where the speaker’s message was that we need to build our faith by increasing our contact with out inner Master through meditation.

When her talk was finished, instead of the usual practice of asking if there were any questions, Baba Ji took the microphone and in a very solemn voice said that he was considering whether or not to talk to us about a very serious problem. On reflection, he said, he felt it had to be shared with us. He cautioned us not to be afraid, but said that there was a terrorist situation at the Dera.

At this point, as one can imagine, the atmosphere became very tense. He said that they had received information that they were the target of a terrorist plot. Then as everybody experienced a feeling of alarm, Baba Ji went on to reassure us saying we should not worry as they had very good security and had managed to identify the terrorist organization behind the plot, which he said was called M-I-N-D. He said that we have a very good weapon to defend ourselves against it – the Shabd – upon which everyone burst into very relieved laughter.

Baba Ji’s words have been paraphrased, but they bring home to us the power of the mind and its terrorist activities against us. No one wants to live under the threat of terrorism, yet that is exactly what we impose on ourselves – we fill ourselves with terror through our own misguided thinking.

Immediately we perceive a conflict situation we develop a battle plan, identifying the terrain, the strategies and tactics to be employed.

We choose the weapons of war: fear, worry, hurt, anger or whatever negative emotion we select. We load the weapon with poorly made ammunition: disinformation, misinformation, injustice and irrational thought, and then we command the onslaught against ourselves as we persistently fight ourselves. And then we wonder why we find life a constant battle!

Why does the mind find misinformation, disinformation and gossip so attractive? Why do we find the weapons for seeking the truth, our simran and bhajan, so unappealing? We crave excitement, and the ego thrives on a prolonged and difficult struggle – a constant battle of wits. From the moment we wake in the morning until we fall sleep at night, the churning chaos of the mind is thrust on us as it runs riot.

We need to take control of our thoughts and thinking so that we can live a life of peace and calm. The Masters give us simran and bhajan, very effective weapons to counteract our own mental terrorist activity – if only we would use them correctly and effectively.

Through the practice of simran we learn to do our worldly tasks while we simultaneously remain focused in our centre. During our ordinary daily activities we should try to continue the task of constant, unrelenting repetition, trying not to allow distractions to break our rhythm. We must focus on what we are doing. We should also never give all our attention to the mind and the external world, but hold back on some of our precious attention, keeping it focused within. At first this will take a huge amount of effort, but the Masters assure us that as time goes on, it does become habitual and automatic, requiring less and less effort until finally it becomes effortless, moving under its own momentum.

We need to be conscious and aware of this process so that we do not allow the attention to slip away and let the mind take over again.

We must learn to keep that inner door ajar so that immediately the mind sounds the battle cry, we can call on the Master for help. Baba Ji has said that in the face of adversity we forget the Master. Sadly, when we need his help the most we close the door – we shut him out and stop our simran.

It is possible to control and reduce our negative thoughts and emotions. It is possible to create and increase our positive thoughts. It is possible to keep our simran going and to reach the ultimate nature of mind, which is pure. It just takes a little awareness and effort. As a Tibetan Buddhist master wrote:

> The mere recognition of awareness will not liberate you. Throughout your lives from beginningless time, you have been enveloped in false beliefs and deluded habits. From then till now you have spent every moment as a miserable, pathetic slave of your thoughts! And when you die, it’s not at all certain where you will go. You will follow your karma, and you will have to suffer. This is the reason you must meditate, continuously preserving the state of awareness you have been introduced to.… But if you do not meditate and get used to it, you will be left like a baby on a battlefield: you’ll be carried off by the enemy, the hostile army of your own thoughts.
> <sub>Dudjom Rinpoche, _Counsels From My Heart_</sub>

## The Invisibility Cloak

In recent years the series of popular Harry Potter books have grabbed the imagination of the whole world and been widely read by children and adults alike. They have become what are perhaps some of the best-known fantasies ever written.

Anyone who knows anything about the magic of Harry Potter will tell you that this young wizard has a cloak that he uses – an invisibility cloak. And when he covers himself with it, no one knows he is there. He can observe what people are doing and he can listen to their conversations, but he remains invisible to them.

We too are living our own amazing story: the story of a soul on its way to God-realization. Although our story is one of sublime truth, it also has a definite ring of fantasy about it, because it is about the greatest miracle of all. And in our story there also exists an invisibility cloak.

We know that the Master placed his Radiant Form inside us when we were initiated. We are striving to reach a point in our meditation where we will meet that form, where we will be able to see it. But we ourselves have woven the invisibility cloak which covers the Master’s inner form and hides him from our inner vision. We have woven it from the yarn of karmas of untold lives, a lack of concentration, insufficient dedication and regrettable lapses of commitment.

And now the only way to unravel that cloak is by using the methods the Masters tell us about: constant simran, total dedication to the path, living in his will and commitment to the four principles given to us when the miracle of our initiation happened – with extra-special attention given to the fourth principle: regular and devoted meditation, the one where we are most likely to slip up. The invisibility cloak will not be able to withstand this way of life indefinitely. Sooner or later it must and will dissolve and Master’s Radiant Form will become visible.

In the meantime, let us always remember that he is there, even though we cannot see him. He sees us, every second of every day. He is aware of our acts, he knows our weaknesses and he is even aware of our thoughts – in itself a scary thought! But it is comforting to think that he also knows when we are sincerely trying. He knows of our struggles, and welcomes even our failures.

So let us try to act as we would if we could see him standing next to us – because he is. And let us try to live the kind of life that he expects his disciples to live. Every little effort we make, every time we chase an unworthy thought from our mind with simran, every time we feel love for him, we are coming closer to the day his invisibility cloak will disappear and we will be able to bask in his radiance.

> It’s a very strange thing – I can tell you a little from my personal experience also. First, we have no love for the path, we have no love for the Master. The Master forces us to love him, he creates love for the Lord in us.…
> And when that love arises in us, when we become a victim of that love, then he conceals himself. Then it’s a game of hide-and-seek.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Die to Live_</sub>

## Essence

Sant Mat is about essence, or truth or love: words synonymous with what we mean when we utter the word ‘God’.

There is only one Word worthy of our full attention and constant remembrance – a Word that we comprehend not through learning but through direct perception. This Word is Shabd, also referred to in the Bible as the Word. It’s also called the Kalma by Muslims, the Tao by the Chinese, the Holy Ghost by Christians and the Holy Name or Spirit by Jews.

All other words are merely containers which each one of us will fill with our own wine – a product of our limited understanding, cultural background, geography, personal history and above all, past sanskaras – the experiences we have collected.

Mystic philosophers through the ages have taught the same truth about the essence of the Word; this essence can be experienced by all people through direct perception, which is the only worthwhile communication. Direct perception is a faculty of the soul which is above the intellect and beyond semantics. In other words, what we experience through direct perception cannot be conveyed in ordinary language. One can only experience it for oneself and it is impossible to communicate it to someone else.

Mystics, all of them perfect living Masters, have all declared the same truth:

-
there is only one God, who is the essence that we call life, life-force, spirit, Shabd or all the myriad names we may find for God;
-
this essence is in everything;
-
essence or God can only be found through stillness within one’s self through the practice of meditation, sometimes termed “to die a living death”;
-
this meditation requires initiation by a perfect living Master and submission to him. Then it is just a matter of practice.

In Sant Mat everything one could ever hope for begins and ends with the perfect living Master. He teaches us to become vegetarians and to abstain from alcoholic drinks and recreational drugs as we try and live a moral life and give one-tenth of every day to meditation. Soami Ji says in _Sar Bachan:_

> Leaving everything else aside, one must implicitly obey the Sat Guru of his own time, and faithfully follow his instructions. This will lead him to success. This is the long and short of everything.

All saints bring the same message – that this world is not perfect, that it will never be perfect and that it is not our home. Those souls who are marked will eventually be led to the presence of the perfect living Master of the time and be initiated into the path of eternal liberation. For initiates on the path, nothing else remains. Baba Jaimal Singh reiterates time and again that it is only the pralabdh, the fate karma for this life – or, in other words, the giving and the receiving

-that has to be dealt with. Our sole purpose for being here is to meditate and grow spiritually. He says:
> The compassionate Hazur in his Shabd form is always with you.
> … The disciple should not do what his mind dictates, but should remain within the will of the Master. Worldly duties have to be carried out, because when the fruit is ripe, it drops automatically from the tree.…
> If after being born in a human body one meets a perfect Sat Guru, then everything is accomplished. This is the fruit. To stay within the will of the Sat Guru is the ripening of the fruit; to attend daily to meditation to the best of one’s ability is watering the tree; and to merge in the Shabd-dhun is the ripening and the falling of the fruit.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Letters_</sub></sub>

The Greek philosopher Plotinus says the following about death:

> There is no death of anyone save in appearance only, even as there is no birth of anyone, but in appearance only. For when anything turns away from its essence to assume a nature, there is the notion of “birth”, and in the same way when it turns away from the nature, to the essence, there is the notion of a “death”, but in truth there is neither a coming into being nor a destruction of any essence, but it is only manifest at one time and invisible at another.
> This manifestation and invisibility are due respectively to the density of the material assumed on the one hand, and to the density of the essence on the other.
> <sub><sub>As quoted by Roger Lipsey in _Coomaraswamy, His Life and Work,_ Vol. III,</sub></sub>

This essence is the Shabd and every individual soul is a particle of the Shabd, just as a drop of water is the same as the ocean. In essence water is the same wherever it is found, whether in India, Alaska or elsewhere. It might be somewhat polluted, but it can be purified.

Similarly, electricity is the same wherever it is found. It could be weaker or stronger depending on the amperage, but if one presses the switch the light will shine. Gold, no matter how much filth covers it, remains pure beneath the dirt.

As unworthy as we are, it is the Master’s love that has finally brought us to the path. He will find every one of his marked souls and pull them into his fold when the time comes for that soul to start its journey home. With initiation the process of purifying the water, of cleansing the gold, starts. All he asks from us is to follow the principles and to try our best to do our simran – repeating the five holy names he gives us. Simran is our lifeline, for as he often says, “I am closer to you than breathing”.

We may feel hopeless and desperate when we read how difficult it all seems, and we get tied up in knots worrying about our progress on the path, even though the Masters assure us time and again that the results are not in our hands and we should just try to do our best. As Baba Ji asks us, just sit and do nothing. It is the Master’s love that is doing it all.

It is all love and love conquers all. God’s love for us will make this personal miracle happen. But sadly, it seems, we have no concept of what this word “love” really means. In the Sant Mat sense, it is the love of the Master for his disciple.

The Great Master once said that if one could look down from a great height to this creation, one would see that it is nothing but a gigantic rubbish dump. If you put a child on a rubbish dump, it will inevitably get thoroughly soiled, and it will be quite a task to clean it. We are now in the process of being cleaned, and this is being done with a love which is beyond human understanding.

Gradually we will become aware of the Master’s presence at all times and see him everywhere, for there is nothing but the Master; he is all there is and everything is in his hands.

At initiation his Radiant Form takes its seat within the disciple, from where he administers our whole metamorphosis. Slowly but surely and imperceptibly the merging process starts, and eventually the drop once more disappears into the ocean of pure love.

Maharaj Charan Singh used to say that love is within us and is not to be found anywhere outside. The love and recognition that we seek from the body Master is already within us. Our souls are already in love with the Lord. His gifts can be had here and now at the eye centre. We only have to believe and look.

The Masters repeatedly tell us we must meditate. However difficult or impossible it might seem at times, meditation is the only way. And as Soami Ji promised, he himself will see that this meditation gets done, for it is his love that does it all.

> Q. So the real form of the disciple is the same as the real form of the Master?

M. What is the real form of the Master? Shabd. And what is the real form of the disciple? Soul. And what is the difference between soul and Shabd? It is the level of consciousness. The real form of everybody is potentiallly the same. Potentially everybody is God because we have the capacity to become God. So the real Sarup of every disciple is ultimately that of the Master because he will merge into the Master and become the Master, and after becoming the Master, he will become the Father.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Heritage_</sub>

## Enlightenment

We are privileged to have the words of great souls who have risen to the ultimate spiritual heights to become one with the Divine, and who have been willing to share something of their experience with us.

The seventeenth-century saint Tukaram spoke openly of his enlightenment. In the book _Tukaram, Saint of Maharashtra_, we read his ecstatic proclamation of his uniting with the Supreme: “I have merged in Him!” He further declared:

> Divine joy is seething through my entire being And all my emotions are unified in the Lord As the rivers meet in the ocean.

During a question and answer session with his disciples, an Indian spiritual teacher and philosopher Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj Ji revealed that he himself had become one with the infinite ocean of consciousness, beyond existence, space and time. A questioner asked how he’d achieved this:

The Master replied:

> I did my best to follow my teacher’s advice and in a comparatively short time I realized within myself the truth of his teaching. All I did was to remember his teaching, his face, his words, constantly.
> <sub>Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj, _I am That_, Part 1</sub>

## Pride – The Powerful Passion

Pride or ego is reputed to be the most powerful of our passions and the very last to leave us. The most dangerous aspect of pride is its subtlety. It has been described as a black ant on a black rock in the darkest of nights. This description is meant to convey the invisibility of pride.

The Masters often warn us that pride is so subtle that even thinking we are humble is a form of pride. Pride is vanity and it is also the awareness of the self, the I-ness – not the true self or the soul. Pride is about preserving the self that we are familiar with.

Pride is about self-interest and self-importance. It manifests in the form of us talking about ourselves, our achievements, our experiences, our successes, our failures, and our family. It also manifests in thinking that we are right and others are wrong. If someone offers us good advice, instead of assessing whether we should follow that advice or not, our pride steps in and we may question their right to give us advice. For example, if someone advises us to avoid watching violence on television as it might affect our meditation, and if we enjoy this type of programme, we are likely to challenge that person angrily.

Why do we often shoot the messenger? The messenger only conveys the message. Let us value the message and not condemn or judge the messenger. Let’s rather analyse the benefits of the message and take positive action.

Perhaps we are afraid of the truth because it strikes at the heart of our habits and practices and reveals our true character and weaknesses. It is our pride, our ego and our notion of always being right that stands in the way. This is the very reason that people never learn from their mistakes.

Pride prevents us from improving ourselves because we make the fatal assumption that we are right. The Masters tell us that pride’s fundamental assumption is its own infallibility. We don’t listen to others and won’t take any advice or criticism. The moment someone criticizes us we defend ourselves to prove we are right. Pride is that part of our thinking that makes us feel more important than others, and that we are right while others are wrong. Many ascetics, holy men, and swamis have, after years of sacrifice and deprivation, succumbed to the subtle passion of pride, despite their years of seclusion and discipline.

Pride is subtle – it cannot see itself because it sees nothing but self. It can never see its own imperfections. It sees its own shortcomings reflected in others while it imagines itself perfect.

Another subtle manifestation of pride is when we tell others what to do without being asked for our opinion. The big assumption is: “I am right!” This assumption leads to arguments, fights, disputes, wars and bloodshed. Yet its opposite – humility – leads to sharing, caring and serving.

We must not be afraid of the truth or the ideal, even if we are not practising it. We must remember that we are here in the creation because we are all imperfect and that we are all striving for the same goal.

Maharaj Charan Singh once said that Sant Mat presents the ideal so that we can strive for it. It doesn’t mean that those who follow Sant Mat always practise the ideal. We are all struggling souls and we are all striving to achieve the ideal. But if the ideal is not presented to us, what will we strive for?

## The Final Journey

It is the divine genius of creation that the Love Stream, God-in-motion, is a current of the purest, most intoxicating love-light. It is the distillation and concentration of all romantic loves multiplied to infinity.

Just one taste of this love and the mind is utterly smitten and cannot get enough of the bliss. It now automatically lets go of all the lesser pleasures that so distract it from the divine, much like a small child who, when offered an opalescent pearl, automatically throws away the grubby little stone that she has been clinging to for ages.

Attaching yourself to the Real, you automatically detach yourself from the unreal. Never the other way around. Having taken hold of the Greatest Love and let go of lesser loves, the soul at last mingles again with its own kind. Day by day the mind is purified and illumined in the great River of Love.

And as that barrier is cleansed and made transparent to the love shining within itself, it experiences an even greater sensitivity to the pull of love, an even greater rapture, and is set on fire with a longing to merge back into the source of this intoxicating love.

In this way the soul journeys along an ever-increasing continuum of love back to the source of all love.

All those who have made the Incredible Journey say the same:

> In the beginning there is love. In the middle there is love.
> In the end there is love. It is all love.
> <sub>Henry Mann, _Love Stream_</sub>

> Maharaj Sawan Singh
> <sub>April 2011 43</sub>

## Seeking Happiness

Nasrudin saw a man sitting disconsolately at the wayside, and asked what ailed him.

“There is nothing of interest in life, brother,” said the man; “I have sufficient capital not to have to work, and I am on this trip only in order to seek something more interesting than the life I have at home. So far I haven’t found it.”

Without another word, Nasrudin seized the traveller’s knapsack and made off down the road with it, running like a hare. Since he knew the area, he was able to out-distance him.

The road curved, and Nasrudin cut across several loops, with the result that he was soon back on the road ahead of the man whom he had robbed. He put the bag by the side of the road and waited in concealment for the other to catch up.

Presently the miserable traveller appeared, following the tortuous road, more unhappy than ever because of his loss. As soon as he saw his property lying there, he ran towards it, shouting with joy.

“That’s one way of producing happiness,” said Nasrudin.
> <sub>Idries Shah, _The Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin_</sub>

> We should be happy under all circumstances, means if you adjust to a situation, you will be happy whatever the circumstances.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Die to Live_</sub>

## Love – The Inner Voice

Romantic love is the limited point of reference from which most of us attempt to understand divine love, the law of God.

It is this physical love that leads us to believe we understand what love is, but actually we haven’t a clue about real love and truth. Spiritual love is very different from physical love, and it is through our meditation that we begin to understand this difference. This is the time when we listen for the voice of God and seek his divine love within.

Maharaj Charan Singh tells us in _Quest for Light_ that simran and bhajan are the only things that will ultimately put us in touch with the voice of the Lord that is ringing within us. Therefore the best part of our day should be when we meditate, when we communicate with God, calling his name and listening for his reply. It is a state of oneness that we are trying to achieve, in which we merge our love in him. The Masters talk of the drop merging back into the ocean of love: losing one’s identity and becoming another being. But why would we want to lose our identity?

This idea is touched on in the movie _Avatar_, in which a trained marine soldier gets to learn and experience what it is like to be able to connect, feel and communicate with every creature: plant or animal, bird or beast, as though he were interacting with human beings.

This experience changes him to such an extent that he wants to leave his old identity and body behind. As his values, views and understanding change, he finds that his old identity has no more significance or importance to him.

This is the crux of our meditation: to lose our identity, to transform ourselves into the divine and merge back into the ocean of his love.

This is the ultimate experience of love and joy that the Masters speak about. They tell us that happiness and bliss are within us, but inour ignorance we look for happiness outside ourselves, in fleeting worldly pleasures.

If we lose something inside our home, we will never find it if we look for it outside. Similarly, we must look inside ourselves for the answers we seek. Having searched everywhere and not found God anywhere outside, we finally realize that the place to look for him is in the darkness within, in the inner stillness – through meditation. If we would only put into practice what the Master teaches us, we would find the answers; we would discover the truth within through our own inner enquiry. For it is only when we turn within and look for the Lord there, that we will begin to experience what true love is.

Love is more than a feeling or an attitude; it is more than a bond in a relationship. It is the nectar of the universe: one Sound, one Word, one Logos, one Shabd, one God – Oneness, the ultimate union.

In _Adventure of Faith_ the author offers this advice:

> Preserve your heart’s capacity to love, for you know not whether God will one day ask you for your undivided heart.

Our Master has taught us how to meditate: how to listen, look and commune in the stillness within our own selves. Through meditation we learn to trust our own intuition and to experience without any doubts, not only the inner voice of God, but also the light and love of Oneness.

It is through unshakeable faith that we will reach the stage where we are willing to give up this entire physical creation, simply leave it all behind for those great mines of bliss and happiness within.

Maharaj Charan Singh has told us that this is a path of love, and love only. In _Quest for Light_ he tells us how to develop that love, saying:

> The more you are attached to Shabd, the nearer you will be to the Master and the stronger shall be your love for him. The more you will love the Master, the more will the love of God grow in your heart.…
> The best way to develop love for the Master is to devote your time to simran and bhajan. The more time you spend in the spiritual exercises with faith, love and humility, the greater will be your love for the Master and God.

> Within the mind’s eye My love doth ever lie. Each moment to my gaze His glory is ablaze.
> Whoso with His splendour is stricken so, Forgetful of himself doth verily grow.
> <sub>Sarmad, as quoted in</sub>
> <sub>_Discourses on Sant Mat_, Vol. I</sub>

## Book Review

**The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying**

By Sogyal Rinpoche, edited by Patrick Gaffney and Andrew Harvey

Publisher: San Francisco: Harper Collins, 2002. ISBN: 0-06-250834-2

In this book Tibetan Buddhist Lama Sogyal Rinpoche addresses squarely a topic that most people avoid, the topic of death. He says that when one faces death, one’s frame of mind is of critical importance. To approach death with equanimity and a spiritual orientation, rather than going through the anguish of clinging to a life that is being ripped away, takes a lifetime of spiritual practice. Accordingly, the first major section of the book is entitled “Living.” In this section, the reader is treated to a remarkably succinct and clear presentation of Tibetan Buddhist philosophy and spiritual practice.

The next major section, entitled “Dying,” focuses on the actual process of dying. Sogyal Rinpoche offers insights from Tibetan Buddhism on how an individual can adopt the best attitude and approach to death. He also gives advice for those who are with a dying person on how best to help that person. His descriptions of both the process of dying and the meditative techniques that help the dying person are quite detailed, but the most essential point is summed up when he says:
> In all religious traditions it is held that to die in a state of prayer is enormously powerful.… To create the most positive possible imprint on the mind-stream before death is essential. The most effective practice of all to achieve this is a simple practice of Guru Yoga, where the dying person merges his or her mind with the wisdom mind of the master, or the Buddha, or any enlightened being. Even if you cannot visualize your master at this moment, try at least to remember him, think of him in your heart, and die in a state of devotion. When your consciousness awakens again after death, this imprint of the master’s presence will awaken with you, and you will be liberated. If you die remembering the master, then the possibilities of his or her grace are limitless.

The third section of the book is entitled “Death and Rebirth.” Here Sogyal Rinpoche describes the various stages that a person passes through between death and rebirth. As he describes each experience a person faces during this transition, a recurring theme is the need to maintain a calm, disinterested poise. One can only too easily be caught up in fascination with or fear of the sights and sounds encountered.

Whether or not this description of death intrigues you, it is easy to see the connection between the state of mind he is recommending and the lifelong practice of meditation. Sogyal Rinpoche recounts an incident when, as a young disciple, he was meditating in the company of his lama:
> Then one day, when I was receiving the teaching and practicing with him, I had the most astounding experience. Everything I had ever heard about in the teachings seemed to be happening to me – all the material phenomena around us were dissolving – I became so excited and stammered: “Rinpoche … Rinpoche … it’s happening!” I will never forget the look of compassion on his face as he leaned down toward me and comforted me: “It’s all right … it’s all right. Don’t get too excited. In the end, it’s neither good nor bad …”

His lama taught him that inner experiences can be traps, if one gets attached to them. “You have to go beyond them into a deeper and more stable grounding: It was to that grounding that his wise words brought me.”

Throughout this discussion of living and dying, Sogyal Rinpoche weaves in the story of his childhood in Tibet and his years of discipleship. This story greatly enriches the book. We get a taste of the love between master and disciple and of the warm, human dimension of this spiritual path. He says of his lama, “Jamyang Khentse is the ground of my life.” Expressing the profound effect of this relationship, he says, “Had I not met my master Jamyang Khyentse, I know I would have been an entirely different person. With his warmth and wisdom and compassion, he personified the sacred truth of the teachings and so made them practical and vibrant with life.” Speaking of his master’s kindness, his many small acts of tenderness and generosity, he writes:
> In my tradition we revere the master as being even kinder than the buddhas themselves. Although the compassion and power of the buddhas are always present, our obscurations prevent us from meeting the buddhas face to face. But we can meet the master; he or she is here, living, breathing, speaking, acting, before us to show us, in all the ways possible, the path of the buddhas: the way to liberation.

The author stresses that devotion is the key to making the heart receptive to the transmission of blessings from the master. A Tibetan saint expressed this point with vivid imagery: “When the sun of fierce devotion shines on the snow mountain of the master, the stream of his blessings will pour down.” This is illustrated by the experience of Jikme Gyalwe Nyugu:

> For many years he had been doing a solitary retreat in a cave in the mountains. One day when he came outside, the sun was pouring down; he gazed out into the sky and saw a cloud moving in the direction of where his master, Jikme Lingpa, lived. The thought arose in his mind, “Over there is where my master is,” and with that thought a tremendous feeling of longing and devotion surged up in him. It was so strong, so shattering, that he fainted. When Jikme Gyalwe Nyugu came to, the entire blessing of his master’s wisdom mind had been transmitted to him, and he had reached the highest stage of realization, what we call “the exhaustion of phenomenal reality.”

Sogyal Rinpoche points out that it is ultimately the “inner teacher” that the disciple must focus on. He recounts the way his teacher Jamyang Khyentse explained this point, saying that from beginningless time our true nature has always been Buddha-consciousness, but aeons ago we became obscured.

This true nature, however, our Buddha nature, has never completely surrendered to the tyranny of ignorance; somewhere it is always rebelling against its domination. Our Buddha nature, then, has an active aspect, which is our “inner teacher.” From the very moment we became obscured, this inner teacher has been working tirelessly for us, trying to bring us back to the radiance and spaciousness of our true being. Not for one second, Jamyang Khyentse said, has the inner teacher given up on us.

He went on to explain that for many lifetimes we have hungered and longed and prayed, until our karmas became purified enough for the miracle of meeting the outer teacher to take place:

> The inner teacher, who has been with us always, manifests in the form of the “outer teacher,” whom, almost as if by magic, we actually encounter. This encounter is the most important of any lifetime. Who is this outer teacher? None other than the embodiment and voice and representative of our inner teacher. What else could explain why we feel so strongly connected to him or her?

Sogyal Rinpoche elaborates on the relationship between the inner and the outer teacher, saying that:

> … the master’s task is to teach us to receive, without any obscuration of any kind, the message of our own inner teacher, and to bring us to realize the continual presence of this ultimate teacher within us.… Not only is the master the direct spokesman of your own inner teacher, he or she is also the bearer, channel, and transmitter of all the blessings of all the enlightened beings. That is what gives your master the extraordinary power to illuminate your mind and heart. He or she is nothing less than the human face of the absolute.

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## He Waits

In the silence my Lord cries out to me.

In the silence he is waiting for me.

The restless beat of my heart tells me that he waits.

In restless procrastination I pile action upon action; he waits.

All day I am busy with task upon task; he waits.

From thing to thing, action to action, thought to thought I fly; still he waits. And while I wait in the silence

I am impatient! “Where is he?” Do I not know in the silence he waits for me?
> <sub>Ruth Harring, _Voice of the Voiceless_</sub>

## Transformation

In 1870 when Baba Jaimal Singh first visited the piece of land that became the Dera, it was completely uninhabited. The terrain was deeply rutted with ravines and the banks of the river Beas rose up quite close to where the International Guest House (Hostel 6) now stands. The area was a lonely, deserted, barren and forbidding waste-land, covered in thorny acacias, spiny shrubs and a few tall trees. It was inhabited by snakes, scorpions, jackals and vultures. There were crocodiles in the Beas River, and the entire area was rumoured to be haunted by ghosts and evil spirits and therefore deemed unsafe to travel through.

Yet it was there, according to Daryai Lal Kapur in _Heaven on Earth,_ that Baba Jaimal Singh chose to build his meditation retreat. Today, 140 years later, the landscape has undergone an incredible transformation. What was once an uninhabited land is now a busy and productive colony.

The transformation that occurred in Beas has everything to do with the Masters, the successive teachers who have resided there. The promise to each initiate is to change them from a wilderness into a rose garden; to take their hearts and minds and souls from this barren and inhospitable place to Sach Khand, a realm of abundance, safety and healing. In other words, the physical Dera itself is an intriguing metaphor for what happens to us within as individuals on the path.

Some part of us probably finds both this world and our own particular personalities an inhospitable realm: lonely, dangerous, unstable. No matter who we are, what wealth, or talent or worldly power we have been given, the soil under everyone’s feet is always shifting. At any given moment, the ground we are walking on can collapse: either we or our loved ones can be swept away by a raging river – literally or emotionally – in any number of unexpected losses. Death, disease, poverty and the changing fortunes of the world are legendary. There is no lasting or safe shelter in this world. The river keeps changing its course and dangers are everywhere. Even in the bright sunlight of the day we can feel uncertain, unsafe and vulnerable.

Then into our threatening and uncertain lives comes a spiritual Master. It is here, in the midst of the wilderness of our hearts and minds, that he takes up residence and promises us that in this unlikely setting, at the eye centre of a typically confused human being, he will show us that there is beauty, joy and a lasting peace and contentment. Here, in this very life, he assures us, we can realize our full potential as spiritual beings. We have a Master now, and our soul will find its true and eternal and joy-filled home.

How does this transformation take place? The Master tells us that it has to do with grace, Shabd and meditation. There are some hints we can find in the transformation at the Dera. The massive ravines that once cut through the land were filled slowly with great human effort. When _mitti_ (dirt carrying) seva was done in past years, everyone would be given a reed basket and a cloth doughnut, to help balance the load on their heads. A shovelful or two of dirt would be deposited in the basket, and people would then carry that load across a broad field, and deposit that small amount of dirt in a deep ravine, over and over and over again. How many millions of baskets did it take to fill one ravine, let alone all of the ravines?

Could it be that every round of simran is a little like one of those baskets full of dirt? It doesn’t seem to accomplish much, and at times, even carrying that one basket is an effort. We trudge back and forth in the same way with every repetition of the five holy names.

Looking out over our own lives and its acres of deep ravines and

6 Spiritual Link karmas, one can understand why we don’t quite grasp how this effort will ever result in even one hole being filled, let alone how this broken earth will ever become a shady, tree-filled garden. But we do the simran and meditation and seva and the heavy lifting of our lives because the Master asks us to. And when we can remember to look up, we can see him watching our efforts, blessing our efforts, encouraging us in this work he has given us to do.

When we were told at initiation that the path of Sant Mat is the work of a lifetime, some of us didn’t quite understand that this meant that this is not a transformation that will occur overnight. But the promise that eventually our spiritual lives will be fruitful and abundant is a promise that the saints make and keep.

When we feel separate from God, it is tempting to think that this path is about some future transformation, some delayed fulfilment: a conceptual and postponed reward. But slowly, constantly, just as it happens at the physical Dera, old walls are being taken down, new habitations are going up, new seeds are being planted. For us, old habits are dying, new and more spacious ways of being are developed. Even when we don’t understand, even when we resist, this miraculous transformation is going on. The Master keeps us in the fold, and keeps watch over us, patiently explaining that we will do our meditation, that we will go through our karmas, and that someday we will be with him forever.

That is the transformation of Sant Mat. Our own inner, barren, lonely and inhospitable wilderness will eventually change into a way of holiness. Slowly, we realize that everything that happens to us is meant to move us closer to what is ultimately true. Eventually we put our trust in our teacher’s vision of what our own personal wilderness is capable of becoming. He says that someday we will be a rose garden – even though it might look and feel to us that we are still a piece of broken ground. He says that someday the separation we feel between ourselves and God will be healed. Someday we will know with every ounce of our being another reality, other than the wilderness of this world.

In his presence we can sometimes catch a glimpse of the joy and peace, right here, right now. Sometimes we can sense the power of his promise. This work of changing distracted initiates into focused disciples is ongoing, in every part of the world. The transformation of the physical outer Dera is astonishing, but apparently not nearly as wonderful as the inner transformation of the Masters’ initiates. The centre of our spiritual activity knows no boundaries, no limitations of time or space. If we are initiates, our rough places are going to be made smooth, no matter where we live. We can never distance ourselves from his love, his protection and his determination to take us home.

We may not be able to imagine how we might ever become worthy of the presence and the company of a saint. But it is in just such a territory that the Master has taken up residence. And if he is optimistic about our eventual rehabilitation and our transformation into loving disciples, who are we to question his methods?

Rumi describes what happens in _this_ garden. Today. Now.

> What was said to the rose that made it open was said to me here in my chest.

> What was told to the cypress that made it strong and straight, what was whispered to the jasmine

 so it is what it is, whatever made sugarcane sweet; whatever was said to the inhabitants …

 that is being said to me now. I blush. Whatever put eloquence in language, that’s happening here. The great warehouse doors open; I fill with gratitude.
> <sub>_Rumi: The Book of Love: Poems of Ecstasy and Longing, translated by Coleman Barks_</sub>

But what if we are still impatient, discouraged or frustrated? Still skeptical that we can ever throw in enough simran to fill in the deep ravines in our being? There is a simple answer.

The Masters tell us to let go. Let the Master gardener do his work.

Welcome his presence. The Master is saying to the soul:

> Have patience, keep the company of the Saints and I shall purify you through my grace.
> I shall not rest, till I show you that form – why are you in such a hurry?
> I carry your burdens in my own heart so that you may be free of worries and nurture your love in my heart.
> Give up your misgivings, be steadfast in your love – a love tempered with faith.
> I shall myself help you put in the effort,
> I shall myself take you to your ultimate home. Listen to what Radha Soami has to say: all will be worked out as and when the supreme will ordains it.
> <sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry,_Bachan 33</sub>

## Lasting Happiness

The saints are always telling us that the happiness we are looking for can only be found inside ourselves. But often it seems very hard to find it there. We want happiness from the world around us. Most of us live with a continual sense of expectation – hoping that this or that situation will improve, that people will change and that we will be able to feel better about life. It is as though we are holding our breath waiting for a happiness that never really comes. So, are we really looking in the right direction? We are never satisfied. Yet we cannot stop ourselves, we cannot help ourselves – or can we?

Masters live in the here and now. They are living the best of realities – always in touch with the spirit, which is the force behind everything that happens. In pain and difficulties, in pleasure and joy, they are always in contact with life’s inner mystery. They radiate powerful currents of love and positivity, affecting everyone who comes in contact with them. Naturally we are attracted to them. Who would not love a person with these qualities? They awaken in us a sense that there is far more to life than what we are usually experiencing. They create in us a longing for a higher state of consciousness and they pull us towards experiencing that reality.

Can our love for a Master give us lasting happiness? We all know that we will have to change if we want to experience what they are experiencing. We cannot carry on forever being obsessed by the trivial goings-on of the world around us. Maharaj Charan Singh used to say that we do not have to leave the world; we just have to forget it!

We need to shift our focus to the power behind the scenes, the current of life behind our eye centre. Whenever we hold our attention at the third eye we feel a difference. When we still our thoughts and are absorbed in the Master, we feel tremendously happy. So why should we be sad? Obviously we can’t blame the world for our unhappy condition and put the burden of improvement on the Master. When we make the effort to tune in to his presence within, we feel tremendous relief. We feel released from all our desires and problems. As soon as we feel the flow of grace, we realize that it was always there, that it is a guiding force with nothing but our well-being at heart.

It is easy to confuse the Master’s outward presence with salvation, thinking he will do it all for us. The face of the Master is indescribable

-it spontaneously evokes all the best emotions in our hearts. It is very sweet. But it is not really ours to keep! His real face is found within the brightness of our own beings. It is a hard fact to accept that the real Master only exists inside ourselves, in the core of the Shabd; for us there is no other Master.

Our love today may not appear to be very strong – but doubtless much deeper currents of love run below the surface of our beings. The

Master will see us through this experience of life and help us succeed in our search for the divine. Love beyond imagination and the brightness and wonder of the Creator – these are within our reach. If we can just follow his advice and look inward, then we will know this happiness for ourselves. Trying to make contact within is the only way to help ourselves.

In the beautiful words of Maharaj Charan Singh:

> Real prayer is not by the lips, not by set words.
> It comes from the heart, and the heart knows the eloquence of silence. The real prayer is surrender to his will.
> <sub><sub>_Legacy of Love_</sub></sub>

Lasting happiness begins when we struggle to direct our love towards him in meditation.

> O you, alone in the sky like the Sun. Come.
> Without your face the garden and the leaves are all yellow. Come.
> Without you, the universe is dust and powder. Come.
> <sub>_Rumi, Thief of Sleep,_translated by Shahram Shiva</sub>

## A Story of Love

In a remote village in Vietnam during the years of war, numerous mortar rounds landed on an orphanage run by a missionary group. The missionaries and one or two children were killed instantly, and several more children were wounded, including an eight-year-old girl.

People from the village requested medical help from a neighbouring town that had radio contact with the nearby American forces. Finally an American doctor and nurse arrived in a jeep, carrying only their medical kits. They established that the girl was the most critically injured and that without quick action she would die of shock and loss of blood. A transfusion was imperative and a donor with a matching blood type was required. A quick test showed that neither American had the correct type, but several of the uninjured orphans did.

The doctor spoke some rudimentary Vietnamese and the nurse, a smattering of high-school French. Using that combination, together with much impromptu sign language, they tried to explain to their frightened young audience that unless they could replace some of the girl’s lost blood, she would certainly die. They then asked if anyone would be willing to give blood to help her.

Their request was met with wide-eyed silence. After several long moments, a small hand slowly and waveringly went up, dropped back down, and went up again. “Oh, thank you,” the nurse said in French. “What is your name?” “Heng,” came the reply.

Heng was quickly laid on a pallet, his arm swabbed with alcohol, and a needle inserted in his vein. Through this ordeal, Heng lay stiff and silent. After a moment, he let out a shuddering sob, quickly covering his face with his free hand.

“Is it hurting, Heng?” the doctor asked. Heng shook his head but after a few moments another sob escaped, and once more he tried to cover up his crying. Again the doctor asked him if the needle hurt, and again Heng shook his head. But now his occasional sobs gave way to steady silent crying, with his eyes tightly shut and his fist in his mouth to stifle his sobs.

The medical team was concerned. Something was obviously very wrong. At this point, a Vietnamese nurse arrived to help. Seeing the little one’s distress, she spoke to him rapidly in his language, listened to his reply and answered him in a soothing voice.

After a moment, the patient stopped crying and looked at the Vietnamese nurse. When she nodded, a look of relief spread over his face.

Glancing up, the nurse said quietly to the Americans, “He thought he was dying. He misunderstood you. He thought you had asked him to give all his blood so the little girl could live.”

“But why then would he be willing to help?” asked the American nurse.

The Vietnamese nurse repeated the question to the little boy, who answered simply, “She is my friend!”

> Friendship means when you have a clean, clear understanding with someone – he accepts you for what you are, and you accept him for what he is.... He wants to help you. You want to help him. That is friendship. It is very rare.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Legacy of Love_</sub>

## Making Right Choices

This is a popular story you may have heard. It’s about a builder who was down on his luck and out of work. When his wealthy friend, a developer, heard of the builder’s plight, he paid him a visit. After a few minutes the developer said to his friend, “I have this choice plot of land. I want you to build me a beautiful house on this lot. Here’s

$200,000 to complete the job. You choose the design, buy the materials and supervise the work. I trust completely that you will do an excellent job. Do this for me and I will reward you well.”

The next day the builder set out to start the project. He looked at a good set of construction plans but found that he could save some money by buying a slightly inferior and outdated set of drawings. So he bought the cheaper ones.

When the time came to buy the concrete he found that he could buy slightly watered down concrete that would not be as sturdy. But he was able to save $5,000 and he pocketed the money for himself.

Then rather than buying grade A lumber for the framing, he bought the cheaper, warped lumber. He figured: “This lumber will be covered by the walls and no one will see it.” So he saved and pocketed some more of the money. And so, in this manner, he kept cutting corners on the construction to enrich himself.

When the builder was done, the house looked quite appealing on the outside, but he knew that there were a lot of serious defects built into it. The builder had managed to divert $40,000 for himself out of the job.

After the construction was complete, his friend the developer, the person who supplied the money and trusted him, returned to inspect the job and to take delivery of the house.

When the developer arrived, he didn’t step a foot inside the house. Rather he admired it from the outside. He then turned to his friend the builder, the one who had done the slipshod work, and said, “Here are the keys to the house. Because you are such a good friend I’m giving it to you for your own home.”

We make decisions in this life all the time. Whether in the light of day or behind closed doors, the decisions we make are always between the Lord and us. We build our own house, and then we have to live in it. When we cut corners we are the ones to suffer, but when we make right choices we are the ones who ultimately gain.

Maharaj Charan Singh used to tell us that Sant Mat is an attitude of mind to be developed, and a way of life to be lived. Continually we are faced with little moral dilemmas: Do we turn to the positive or to the negative? Do we take a step toward our goal or away from it? We mould our lives positively by making right decisions. At each decision point we can do one of two things: We can follow the lower nature of the mind, which leads us more deeply into this world, or we can respond to the higher nature of our mind, which takes us closer to our destination.

In the story, the builder made major decisions that affected the integrity of his finished product. He skimped on the quality of his materials and, in the end, became the owner of the defective house. The consequences of his actions are clear.

In our lives we are constantly facing decisions big and small – mostly small. But these things combine to form the pattern of our lives. Each little decision is woven into the tapestry of our being. Over time, these choices add up, just like when we throw the change from our pocket into a jar at the end of the day. A few coins, day by day, eventually can become enough to buy a new suit of clothes. The decisions that we make are the coinage of our day. And, as time goes by, they add up. What do these choices look like? Perhaps it is deciding whether to watch a little more TV, or shut it off and get to bed, so that we can wake up refreshed for meditation. Perhaps we have to choose not to yield to a temptation (the avoidance of a negative action). Or perhaps it is to do a little bit of simran when our mind is free for a moment (the assertion of a positive action).

As we strive to develop a Master-oriented attitude of mind and to live life rightly, these little moment-by-moment decisions count for a lot. Our work on this path seems not to be so much about some epic battle played out on the stage of life but rather a series of small struggles between the higher and lower nature of our mind.

There’s an old saying that says: If we don’t know where we’re headed, any road will take us there.

Master has described the direction to our home and instructed us on how to get there. It is for us to align our daily activities in a manner consistent with our goals. He has given us a chance to stop our aimless wandering. Every day when we open our eyes, God has given us another golden opportunity to live life rightly and make the best choices. May our decisions large and small take us nearer to our destination.

## Meditation

Meditation has never been an easy thing for anyone before reaching the state of perfect concentration. How can we rise to spiritual heights within just for the asking? It is something we have to earn. The progress is slow, very slow, because of the burden we carry. For how long have you been in this creation collecting all sorts of karmas?

How can you now expect miracles to happen within months or even years? It is a lifelong struggle.

It is not proper for a beggar to shout and cry at the door of the millionaire. That shouting will not open the door. It is humility, submission and meekness which will help and move the heart of the Lord. We cannot demand anything from him. We can only beg.

Therefore do not unnecessarily get so excited and upset. Nothing will be gained by that. Relax and calmly give your time to meditation every day. Instead of blaming the path or the Master, see within yourself where the weakness lies. Have you given regular time to meditation? Have you vacated the body of all consciousness and brought it to the eye centre? Have you tried to live the Sant Mat way of life, detaching yourself gradually from the world and attaching your thoughts to the Lord within? Have you kept the names with you most of the time? In other words, have you followed the instructions given to you at the time of initiation? If we have not done our part, we cannot complain about the shortcomings of Sant Mat.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

## What Matters

The work we have to do in this lifetime is the greatest challenge we have ever faced. Each of us in our own specifically designed mind-made world can hold on to only so many things, and these things are constantly competing for our attention. Each thought is saying, “I matter the most.” The question becomes: Which objects and thoughts do I need the most at this moment, what do I need to focus on next, what problem am I going to give my attention to? The demands that are placed upon us by our family, work, our own internal desires and fears, and the flood of things that our attention is being drawn to by advertising, friends, books, the Internet and movies, all cause our mind to become scattered, and we move through life in a state of emotional turmoil because so much seems to matter to us.

If I am sick and in pain, it matters. If I fall in or out of love, it matters. If I lose my job, it matters. If someone attacks my thoughts or feelings, it matters. If I do not get what I want, it matters. Giving our attention to all these things that matter causes stress, diminishes our health and often makes us feel miserable. These things all matter to us and become a priority because we have expectations and are attached to an outcome. These attachments and expectations come from the aspect of our mind most commonly called ego.

Dr. Julian Johnson writes in _The Path of the Masters:_

> The normal ego is all right, but when it begins to swell up out of all proportion, then it takes on the nature of a disease. So vanity is an overgrown ego.... That faculty, which is quite necessary for the preservation of the individual in this life and for the proper placement of that person in relation to all others, becomes so overgrown that the normal self becomes for him the centre of the universe.

Our egos are dysfunctional and our true self, our soul, has identified with this dysfunctional ego to the extent that we have become egomaniacs. From a spiritual perspective, it is a sickness or certainly and impediment to spiritual progress.

Our dysfunctional egos are vulnerable and insecure, but powerful, and they are constantly forcing us to pay attention to what they want. To make things worse, what matters to us at every moment constantly keeps changing. Karmas from past lives, which the ego labels as good or bad, are constantly arising. If we find out that we have a life-threatening illness, that becomes a priority and becomes what matters to us in our mind. And the ego reacts. The ego puts great value on this new challenge. This is easy to comprehend, but what is insane is that this dysfunctional ego will also automatically overreact in the same way to even the most mundane things that flow into its domain throughout the day.

This dysfunctional ego is only a small illusory spot in relation to our entire spiritual being.

In an evening meeting at Dera, a brother told Baba Ji: “I have such a big ego. Everything is me, me, me. I have little compassion and think I am so important. How can I ever make progress on this path with such a big ego?”

Baba Ji started to laugh. He looked directly at this man and told him that he was wrong, that his ego was actually very, very small; it was nothing.

The reason the Master can say that the ego is miniscule is because he is looking at who we really are, the soul. He is not looking at our ego, he is not judging our ego. To him it is a nothing, a tiny illusory spot. He is looking at what we cannot see, and that is our soul. And that is what he loves. Master often says that he wouldn’t have initiated us if we couldn’t do the work in one lifetime. So our lives can be transformed if only we prioritize and let go of all these things that we think matter so much and concentrate on the big thing, the thing that the Master tells us matters the most: meditation.

> The first essential thing, therefore, is to enter this laboratory within ourselves, by bringing our scattered attention inside of the eye focus. This is a slow process. But we are not justified in saying that we cannot do it, or that it is impossible, or that it is useless.… It is our job and we must do it; and we must do it now, in this very lifetime.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

## Learning to Stay

In meditation we discover our inherent restlessness. Sometimes we get up and leave. Sometimes we sit there but our bodies wiggle and squirm and our minds go far away. This can be so uncomfortable that we feel it’s impossible to stay. This feeling can teach us not just about ourselves but also about what it is to be human. All of us derive security and comfort from the imaginary world of memories and fantasies and plans. We really don’t want to stay with the nakedness of our present experience. It goes against the grain to stay present. These are the times when only gentleness and a sense of humour can give us the strength to settle down.

The pith instruction is, stay … stay … just stay. Learning to stay with oneself in meditation is like training a dog. If we train a dog by beating it, we’ll end up with an obedient but very inflexible and rather terrified dog. The dog may obey when we say: “Stay!” “Come!” “Roll over!” and “Sit up!” but he will also be neurotic and confused. By contrast, training with kindness results in someone who is flexible and confident, who doesn’t become upset when situations are unpredictable and insecure.

So whenever we wander off, we gently encourage ourselves to “stay” and settle down. Are we experiencing restlessness? Stay! Discursive mind? Stay! Are fear and loathing out of control? Stay! Aching knees and throbbing back? Stay! What’s for lunch? Stay! What am I doing here? Stay! I can’t stand this another minute! Stay! That is how to cultivate steadfastness.

<sub>Pema Chodron, excerpted from _The Places that Scare You: A Guide to Fearlessness in Difficult Times_</sub>

## Love Is a Verb

I heard it said once that love is a verb – something you do. That certainly applies to our spiritual practice. We may not have much say about whether we are feeling loving at any given time, but we can always choose to practise love.

A question in _Die to Live_ addresses this:

> I think it’s possible to be loving or to act loving without feeling loving. And sometimes I’m not sure where it’s coming from, whether it’s a real loving feeling or not.

Maharaj Charan Singh answers:

> At least behave in a loving way, and then you may also feel the love within. If you try to develop the habit of acting lovingly, then you may also begin to have a genuine loving feeling for others. At least start by behaving like that.

Let’s take a couple of mundane examples. Perhaps a husband and wife have an arrangement where she cooks and he cleans up the kitchen. Now some nights, he probably doesn’t feel like cleaning. He may not be feeling any love for his wife in that moment, and yet he can choose to take the loving action to clean the kitchen anyway.

Similarly, some nights she probably doesn’t feel like cooking. She may not even be hungry herself. Yet she can choose to take the loving action of fixing the meal.

Some mornings we don’t feel like meditating. We may not be feeling any love for the Master. But we get up and meditate anyway. That is an act of devotion, a loving act.

On the other hand, suppose the husband comes home and his wife is feeling a lot of love for him. She is acting very loving and telling him how much she loves him. After a while of enjoying this he asks her, “Where’s dinner?” She says, “Oh, I didn’t make dinner. I just couldn’t today.” Or maybe, “I was in the kitchen for two and one half hours, but I fell asleep.” Or, “I was in the kitchen, but I was talking on the phone the whole time. I had a lot to say.”

We may feel loving toward the Master, but what will we tell him when he asks, “Where’s the meditation?” Just having loving feelings toward the Master and not taking loving action is not what he wants. That’s not devotion. We need to let our actions reflect our love. We need to make the loving effort.

The Great Master, Maharaj Sawan Singh, wrote that a primary factor in success in controlling the mind and senses is the effort of the disciple. We don’t need heroic effort, but that effort does need to be continual and relentless. It will build in intensity as we become more devoted. We have no idea how much effort our spiritual journey will take. But the rewards are unimaginable. As Great Master says:

> But those of you who remain faithful and go on working to the best of your ability must one day realize how great is the work you have done and how great is the reward which awaits you.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

In answering questions about how hard the path could be, the Master often repeated what may have been one of the greatest understatements of all time when he answered – it is worth the effort. The Great Master sums it up in _Spiritual Gems_: “When this is the only way, and we are to go this way, then why not go now?”

## The Miracle of Simran

How is it that simran is a miracle? First of all, it is miraculous enough that we have met a living Master and have been initiated. Even more miraculous is that we have been given these names that are super-charged with the Master’s divine energy. But the height of the miracle is that we sometimes actually remember to repeat these names.

Without his grace we would never even finish the round of simran we are on, much less start anew even while our mind tries to hijack us into some worldly thought and carry us away with it, again and again. If we knew just how miraculous the repetition of even one round of simran is, we would say each name with deep reverence, overflowing gratitude, focused determination and exuberant joy. With that attitude the simran would change the very foundation of our being. And isn’t that what spirituality is about – changing the very foundation of our being from our worldly focus to a spiritual focus?

We can’t do simran without it changing us – even our sense of identity. We may want to repeat those names and have our ego, our sense of self, stay the same, but that’s impossible. We will, of necessity, lose our sense of self if we keep on repeating the names. Simran is the solvent that dissolves our ego.

We can’t just say the names; we have to let go of ourselves as we do the repetition. We have to let the names dissolve us. Baba Ji says that we should just sit still, repeat the names and let ourselves go. Is it this letting ourselves go that we have such a hard time with? If we say the names without letting go of ourselves, it’s like trying to drive our car by pushing our foot on the accelerator with our other foot firmly planted on the brake. The car goes nowhere.

We are somewhat like a caterpillar that sees butterflies and knows deep inside that being a caterpillar is not its true state. Biologists tell us that a caterpillar must first enter a cocoon and dissolve into proto-plasmic goo, loosing all traces of being a caterpillar, before it begins to transform into a butterfly. So how does our transformation begin?

After initiation, our simran practice is what begins our trans-formation. Simran, along with keeping the four vows, is the solvent that dissolves our ego, our identity, so we can be transformed by him. We are no more able to know what our transformation will be like than a caterpillar can really know what it will be like to become a butterfly. We must experience it.

There is a story of a child that illustrates the idea of the individual transforming and merging into the ocean of God’s love. The child, who was made of salt and very much wanted to know where he had come from. So he set out on a long journey and travelled to many lands in pursuit of this. Finally he came to the shore of the great ocean. “How marvellous,” he cried, and stuck one foot in the water. The ocean beckoned him in further saying, “If you wish to know who you are, do not be afraid.” The salt child walked further and further into the water dissolving with each step, and at the end exclaimed, “Ah, now I know who I am.” The experience of transformation made the child realize who he really was.

As satsangis, we too want to lose the illusion of our separateness and merge into the ocean of Oneness. We experience this as a waking up. Our previous separateness seems like a dream from which we have awakened.

We need to wake up. There is urgency to our need to wake up. We don’t have any time to waste. The Master has given us only just enough time on the earth to fulfil our spiritual purpose here. The sand in our hourglass is trickling away and we don’t know how much time is left. We have no idea how urgent our situation is. We are lost in darkness and in imminent peril of rebirth. We have forgotten who we are and forgotten our true home. Each round of simran brings us closer to remembering our true self and our true home.

In our possession is a miracle, the miracle of simran, which could be described as a continuous filling of the heart and mind with beautiful, grateful and loving awareness of the Master. It’s up to us to take full advantage of this miracle, and cultivate it for all its glorious promise. As Baba Ji frequently reminds us, the ball is in our court.

> No one should give the answer that it is impossible for a man occupied with worldly cares … to pray always. Everywhere, wherever you may find yourself, you can set up an altar to God in your mind by means of prayer. And so it is fitting to pray at your trade, on a journey, standing at the counter or sitting at your handicraft.… By the power of the invocation of the name of God … [one] would come to know from experience that frequency of prayer, this sole means of salvation is a possibility for the will of man.
> <sub>Saint John Chrysostom, as quoted in _The Way of the Pilgrim and_ the Pilgrim Continues His Way</sub>

## Life’s True Purpose

Whether we are aware of it or not, there is one thing, one thing alone, that we crave to feel, to know and to love with every particle of our beings. And that is the divine reality, whom many call God – the deep root of our souls. Seeking after and realizing this fundamental truth is the real purpose of our existence here on earth. Rumi says:

> There is one thing which you must never forget.…
> All human beings come into the world for a particular mission and that mission is our singular purpose. If we do not enact it, we have done nothing.… Remember the deep root of your being, the presence of your Lord. Give your life to the one who already owns your breath and your moments.
> <sub>Rumi, as quoted in Llewellyn Vaughan-Lee, _Love Is a Fire_</sub>

“Remember the deep root of your being,” says Rumi. Remember, that one reality. For, if we have done nothing in our life towards that end, then we have done nothing at all that is worth anything in this world of illusion.

At the level of ordinary human consciousness, we know that God is beyond anything that our limited senses and intellect can grasp. Yet mystics tell us that that one power, God, exists as the constant life-support and consciousness of creation – the essential nature of everything in existence.

Mystics also tell us that it is reasonable to assume that if such a reality does exist, there must be a means by which we can know it. Such a means, they say, does not involve the intellect or the five physical senses – because God is not merely a physical or mental being. Rather, it involves turning our attention within, so that we can transcend the mind and senses and turn our soul to what is subtle, spiritual and essential.

Spiritual essence manifests within the soul in the form of sound and light. It is something that the subtle faculties of the soul can both see and hear within. We are speaking of the creative stream of the life current that is known in various religions.

This Truth, this essence of God, can be experienced only in the human form through the guidance of a God-realized living Master. By means of the subtle vehicle of the sound current, the Master takes his disciples into realms of consciousness deep within the soul, where they can gain true knowledge of the one eternal Lord. In the following, Guru Arjun Dev gives us a hint of his own experience:

> In the society of the Holy, I saw the Lord within myself And I loved the sweet Name of the Lord …
> And my mind is held, and I hear the Celestial Music, Of which I cannot tell, so wondrous is its ecstasy.
> <sub>Guru Arjun Dev, _Sri Guru Granth Sahib,_ translated by Gopal Singh</sub>

We often find that we forget that which is so very close to us, that which is within. That which is part of the appearance of things and temporary, we love. We live in the changing world of appearances and believe the illusion to be solid and real. It never occurs to us that the real unchanging essence of things is something infinitely deeper, infinitely truer. We forget the certainty of our own death and become imprisoned and obsessed by our desires and passions. We pass our lives in such a state until, finally, we are fortunate enough to meet a perfect liberator, a living Master. In the following, Maharaj Sawan Singh describes the unique reality of such a Master:

> The Master is not a creature of this world and is not in the bondage of this body.… The living Master is one with the Lord. He is the true manifestation of the Lord in this world. He has been given the duty of working for the salvation of its creatures. He is the manifestation of the Shabd. He is the source of love.... Only man can guide man. This is the law of nature. The Master assumes human form according to this law, so that he may persuade people and unite them with the Lord through his own strength.
> <sub>_Philosophy of the Masters, Vol.V_</sub>

Relying upon the grace and strength of the Master, the disciple steadily grows in conscious awareness of the Lord’s presence within the soul. The more that spiritual awareness expands, the more the disciple begins to see the ego for the true emptiness that it is. A profound change in understanding begins to take place. This includes a shift in the disciple’s identity, a shift that takes him from believing the self to be the separate ego-self to knowing that his true nature is that of divine spirit. The soul discovers that there actually is no such thing as a separate self. There is only God.

The Persian mystic Aziz Nasafi, as quoted in the book _What is Life?_ says:

> The spiritual world is one single spirit who stands like unto a light behind the bodily world and who, when any single creature comes into being, shines through it as through a window.
> According to the kind and size of the window, less or more light enters the world.

For us, it is the perfect Master who shines in the world as the great beacon light of the spirit. For us, he is a wondrous window, a link into a world otherwise unknown and unexplored by most of us. Sitting in the Master’s physical presence is a great privilege that brings with it a deeper, truer awareness of what it is that we are longing for. The Lord is manifested to our consciousness through the Master. Beauty, purity, love, power and truth are his true qualities. When we love him, we not only love his personality and his physical form, but we love something far subtler and much greater. What we love in the Master is his true essence. Kabir says:

> I fell in love with Him,
> His love like sugar dissolved To fill my soul, my heart;
> My body’s every pore cries ‘Beloved, Beloved’ – Mouth is required no more.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

The disciple, finding himself held in the Master’s love, experiences a communion with him that reaches previously unknown depths.

This brings remembrance and soul recognition. The disciple has been touched by the truth. As Great Master tells us, it is a communion in the deepest intimacy, from soul to soul. He writes:

> The currents of love emanating from the heart of a devotee strike against the heart of the Master, draw power from it, and return to the heart of the disciple with a double force. In this manner the spiritual powers of the Master enter the heart of the disciple and it appears to him that the Master has become one with him, and he himself feels one with the Master. Once the disciple is in communion with the Guru, all the gates of bliss and happiness are open to him.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. II_</sub>

The power of love that is incarnated in the Master automatically awakens love for the Lord in the disciple’s heart. Gradually, through association, there is created in the disciple a clear awareness of, and deep attachment to, the presence of God in his Master. As a result, the disciple falls helplessly in love with the Master.

At the same time, the Master never ceases to urge his disciples to turn their love and longing within, to seek within their souls the divine melody that is the real Master. For he is truly present within us in his Shabd form. This is the purpose of meditation – to know who the Master really is and, thereby, to know the Lord.

Meditation, as taught by the Masters, is a means of moving our consciousness into the Truth, the Shabd, the Essence. They tell us that we must return our attention to its source if we are to find true fulfilment and happiness. Nothing in the world of appearances can fill the emptiness within our hearts and satisfy our deep longing for wholeness. Only surrender, love and devotion to that infinite power can bring satisfaction. We want the real thing, says the Master in so many words. We want the actual.

There is nothing more beautiful, more profound or more precious and holy than meditation because we can never be closer to him than we are then. We meditate simply because we want to be with our Master. We want to be with him wholly, completely and with every particle of our being. There is nothing else in life that can satisfy such longing.

Through the practice of meditation, we awaken gradually to the finer reality of the Shabd Master. What we perceive in the physical Master as his innermost reality, we also perceive in meditation as the substance of our very own souls. We become aware that the real Master also lives within us.

There is no thought or process of reasoning that can lead to the understanding of God or the inner Master. Realization is achieved as a result of direct inner communion with him. The key to inner communion with the Lord and the inner Master is complete surrender in his love. The key to surrender in his love is meditation. For he is not separate from us. He is our deepest innermost self.

On the spiritual path there is room only for one, not for two. And that one must be the real thing; it must be true. Anything that is not true, such as the ego – that I-ness or individuality – can never become part of the Shabd, the one. His truth always exists within us, but there is a veil of I-ness between his reality and our awareness. Therefore, he remains unknown to us – intimately close, yet so very far away. And so, if we are to truly know him, our soul, our true essence, must merge into Shabd, the true essence of the Master. Great Master says: “As long as there is ‘I’, then he does not reveal himself; but when ‘I’ is gone, then only he remains”_(The Dawn of Light)_.

In other words, when the “I” is eliminated, the illusion of ego will vanish. When this occurs, “he” replaces “I” as the authentic, real self. Rather than ego, we find certain knowledge of the Master’s presence.

Spiritual progress is a matter of a deeper, more intimate, more loving communion with the inner Master. When the Master’s love captures the soul and takes it over, our entire awareness is automatically placed in him. Nothing else can exist in such a state. There is nothing left to want. There is no where else to go. And so in this way, we remember the deep root of our being. We fulfil the true purpose of life.

## Living or Reacting?

## Living or Reacting?

## Living or Reacting?

Baba Ji once told us that we are not living. Our whole life is just reacting to our needs and our desires. But when we get into stillness, we are just _being_. What does the Master mean by reacting? And what would it be like to be living as he defines it?

With our minds in control, we are either immersed in the past or considering the future. When something in the present occurs, we have a learned and automatic response to it. We are reacting as our mind dictates. The soul’s response is repressed and unnoticed. Our true self hardly participates in the life we are leading. Perhaps this is what Baba Ji meant when he told us we are not living.

Really living would be a condition in which our true self, our soul, in conscious union with its Creator, is actively participating in the flow of life. It would no longer be a silent prisoner of a mind automatically steering our consciousness; the soul would be free to guide our awareness in an objective reality.

We would experience life as it is, not as we think it is. Our reactions would not come from the mind, trained as it is in a particular manner. Rather, we would not react. Our thoughts and actions would be guided by the soul with its wellspring of compassion and love. Since the soul is in harmony with its Maker, living by its guidance would put us in harmony with everyone and everything. The gift of the present moment, in all its fullness and beauty, would be ours continuously and we would be enveloped in his love.

## Be Nothing, Do Nothing

The Master has been suggesting that we learn to be nothing and do nothing. However, clearly there are some things the Master wants us to be, and some things he wants us to do. He wants us to be good disciples, good family members and good employees. And he also certainly wants us to do our duties to our families, our employers, our friends and our communities. Most importantly, he wants us to do our meditation. So when he says we should learn to be nothing and to do nothing, what could he mean?

This concept may hold the essence of this path: complete surrender to the Master and the Lord. For that is the road we must follow in our return to the Father, in the process of God-realization. But why is this the essence of the path? Because in our present state we are separated from God – or at least we believe we are. Our mind thinks it is a separate entity from everything around it. And it processes everything it sees and does through the filter of ego. This is “my car” and “my job” and “my country”. And the mind thinks that the Lord is a separate entity out there somewhere when, the saints assure us, God is within us and we are made of nothing but him.

We live in a dream world of separateness, centred on our ego. The saint’s job is to wake us up from this dream so we can see that all is God and give ourselves up to him and his will. Some saints speak of this as our waking up from our current sleep state of belief that we are separate. Others speak of this as an annihilation of the ego. As quoted in the book _Sultan Bahu,_ the great Persian mystic Maulana Rum says about this state:

> From all the six volumes of the Masnavi only one voice comes.
> Its essence is
> Dive into the ocean of annihilation.

This passage tells us that the goal of our life is to “dive into the ocean of annihilation,” throwing ourselves fully into the love of the Master and the Lord, so that we lose our individual identity. We cease to exist as separate entities.

This giving up of our identity, learning to be nothing, begins with the three vows we follow before initiation: following the vegetarian diet, avoiding alcohol and drugs, and leading a clean moral life. These are the first acts of surrender we undertake as disciples-to-be.

Meditation, we learn after initiation, is an ongoing exercise in surrender. It’s the key process in our life as a disciple that allows us to practice surrendering and that eventually changes us so that true surrender, surrender to the Shabd is possible. While our meditation may be feeble and seem useless, it is essential because it is an act of submission. Meditation is our prayer to the Father for forgiveness and grace. Without it, and the other actions we take in his name, we are not soft, we are not pliable, and the divine potter cannot reshape us in his image. In a recent _Spiritual Link_ article (May 2009), the author wrote, “… the whole secret is to make yourself ready. God does the rest”. Our attempts to meditate and to live the teachings are a part of what make us ready.

When we try to meditate and fail to achieve anything, we think there is a problem. We can become disappointed. It’s important to remember that spiritual practice is not like operating a vending machine, where we put in a dollar, and out comes a soda. In a vending machine there is a direct connection between the dollar in and the soda out. In spiritual practice, there is also input (meditation) and output (advancement within), but no apparent linkage between the two.

And when we accept that our efforts at meditation are not directly linked to results, that acceptance may be a part of our learning to surrender to the Master. It is a part of our learning to be and do nothing. The Great Master, Maharaj Sawan Singh, writes very beautifully about this process:

> Your duty is to sit within and knock at the door, and the door will open. The Power within does not err. It will open the door when it finds that the time has come. Increase your love and devotion, and entrust yourself entirely to its care. The Power within is not ignorant of what you are doing. It is with you and constantly watches you and guides you. When your love for that Power exceeds your love for yourself and the I-ness has been replaced by Thou-ness, the form of the Guru will make its appearance visible within.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

Here is how Baba Jaimal Singh, in _Spiritual Letters,_ describes the state of surrender:

> So long as the disciple does not take out the self by surrendering his all to the Satguru and removing himself from everything, he will not be liberated. So surrender your self and step aside my son. Consider that each and every thing in the world – body, mind, and wealth – belongs to the Satguru, that you are nothing. Do all your work knowing it to be thus, and stay within the Satguru’s instructions. He will take you with him when he considers you fit.

In another letter, Baba Jaimal Singh writes directly about doing nothing:

> Entrust everything to him and do all your worldly work, and also keep doing your bhajan and simran. But know in your heart that “I am not the doer. I do not exist at all.”

We began with the present Master’s advice that we learn to be nothing and do nothing. Isn’t he saying exactly what Baba Jaimal Singh is also saying above? In the state described, the disciple has learned to “be nothing.” He simply has ceased to exist and only the Master and Shabd remain. And he has learned to “do nothing,” since he knows (because he can see it happening) that the Shabd does everything, and he does nothing.

So in his statement that we have to learn to be nothing and do nothing, Baba Ji has laid before us the greatest goal a human being can strive for: to dive into that ocean of love and lose ourselves in it – to surrender completely to our Master.

How do we do this? In the following two short passages Maharaj Charan Singh gives us the answer to this question. That answer, of course, has to do with meditation. “The main thing is meditation; and satsang, because it strengthens meditation; and seva, because it leads to meditation” _(Spiritual Heritage)_. “From meditation, love will come, submission will come, humility will come. Everything will come” _(Die to Live)._

## Love and Reason

The human intellect and the knowledge acquired through it cannot take us beyond the limits of space and time. Love, on the other hand, can transcend all these limits and take us to the imperceptible, incomprehensible and indescribable region where the Lord abides.…

Sultan Bahu says all those who have not learned the lesson of love wander about in delusion, bereft of the experience of reality:

> They have read thousands of books, they have come to be known as great scholars. But the one word, ‘love’, they could not grasp – so helplessly they wander in delusion.
> A lover, with but one glance of love, can carry millions to their deliverance. But a million glances cast by a scholar will not ferry a soul across to salvation.
> Vast is the gulf between love and intellect.
> Those who have not purchased love in the market place of this life, O Bahu, will always be losers in this world and the next.
> <sub>_Bait 33_</sub>

## Polishing the Mirror

In _Love’s Alchemy, Poems from the Sufi Tradition_, a mystic writes:

> The first step in love is losing your head.

> After the petty ego, you then give up your life and bear the calamity.

> With this behind you, proceed:
> Polish the ego’s rust from the mirror of your self.

_The first step_… is losing your head. In meditation we do our best to enter a space of silence where the continuous noise in our head ceases and all the petty concerns of the self are kept at bay. During the day we strive to keep constant vigilance over our minds while doing simran. Meditation, vigilance and simran lead to the silencing of the domineering automatic machine of the mind that sustains our ego.

The saints describe the ego as an illness, a serious affliction that has created the long-enforced notion that there is an “I”, a self that exists apart from the Lord. The idea of “me” and “mine” is based on a false concept. In truth, the Lord sustains our every breath and everything belongs to him, including our souls.

In _Quest for Light_ Maharaj Charan Singh writes:
> The very ego that we want to crush is the only barrier between us and the Lord. The moment you lose your identity and merge yourself into him, he appears before you. Ego is our only enemy, which attaches us to this world, and the whole struggle is to eliminate it from within ourselves.

_After the petty ego, you then give up your life_… Once we have conquered the mind that has its home in Trikuti, we are able to know the will of the Lord. At that stage we willingly give our lives to him, knowing him to be in charge and accepting everything in life with equanimity.
_… you then give up your life and bear the calamity._Giving up our life is surrendering to the One who knows what is best for us – better than we know ourselves. It is relinquishing the illusion of control over our life and accepting events as they unfold.

Baba Ji has told us we must learn to let go. He said the hardest thing for us is to let go. He asked: What is so difficult? Someone is willing to take over all our burdens, and we refuse to let him. It’s like the person on the train with a suitcase on his head. Everyone tells him to put it down and he says, “No, it’s mine!”

When we trust in God enough to let go of our imagined control over life, _we begin to polish the ego’s rust from the mirror of our self._ The saints tell us that human beings are made in the image of God. We are of the same essence. Our souls reflect the same attributes as their Maker. But a growth of dirt and corrosion has covered them. The ego, our notion of self-importance and our conviction that we are separate and independent of our Maker, has encased the pure and shining mirror of the soul. How is the mirror to reflect the love and compassion, the beauty and joy of its Creator when the mind is completely dominant, supporting the ego at all costs?

Polishing the mirror is taking control over the mind with its negative tendencies and its habit of seeking pleasure from the senses. It is ceasing to indulge the mind which is like a bottomless well. To gain control over one’s thoughts, simran is an invaluable tool.

In addition to controlling our thoughts through simran, we must be careful what we expose our mind to, through books, movies, discussions.

The American philosopher Henry David Thoreau writes in _Life Without Principle_:

> We should treat our minds, that is ourselves, as innocent and ingenious children, whose guardians we are … and be careful what objects and what subjects we thrust on their attention. Read not the Times. Read the Eternities.

As guardians of our minds, we keep our attention in repetition, and in the awareness of the Master’s presence. In remembrance of his pure, radiant and loving presence, the ego retreats and we let go the notion of control. As the fabricated self is scoured from our mind, we expose mirror of our soul. The clear light of Shabd then fills our consciousness and is reflected back into the world.

## The Difference

Maharaj Sawan Singh says: “It is the business and duty of every disciple to make the mind motionless and reach the eye centre. The duty of the Master is to help and guide on the path” (_Spiritual Gems)._

The Master has said many times that the seemingly daunting task of making the mind motionless, while not easy, is attainable in this lifetime.

The Master is waiting for us, yet we are very much like children taking a family vacation. Initially, it looks like everyone is ready to depart. Then there is constant interruption, as each family member runs back into the house to get one more “essential” thing to take on the journey. What can a father do? He’s honking the horn for the family to come and hoping that they are ready and will jump in the car with him so the journey can begin. Much in the same way, the Master is sounding the horn of Shabd, inviting us to come with him on the journey to the eye centre.

We are reminded that reaching the eye centre can only be obtained through stillness. Stillness of the mind is strongly supported by stillness of the body. Initally, stillness may seem passive, but eventually we find it requires great effort. This effort makes the difference. Effort is the cornerstone of accomplishing any task and is active in its nature. Stillness of the mind and the body comes from the way we live, the way we speak, the way we think, the way we adhere to the principles of the path and, most certainly, on the way we focus on our meditation. Maharaj Charan Singh says in _Die to Live:_
> One has to change one’s entire way of life and one’s attitude toward life. To follow Sant Mat requires a complete transformation, so it’s not easy. One has to sacrifice a lot in life.

We cannot give up; we have the capacity to reach our goal. This transformation is a slow process and stillness can only be accomplished through relentless effort. The way to stillness begins with repetition of simran and is supported by the myriad of decisions that we are confronted with on a daily basis. If we are honest with ourselves, can we say that we have made each decision in support of our meditation? For example, on the one hand, the mind may tell us that we can’t sit for two and a half hours in meditation; on the other hand, the Master says we can. Who is right? Success in reaching two and a half hours won’t happen by wishing it. It is a pragmatic decision.

If we want to succeed, we can figure out a way to increase our time in meditation until we reach our goal. Master has said there is always something more we can do. The way to get there is through our effort. Maharaj Sawan Singh in _Spiritual Gems_ says:

> I am well aware that you have struggles. You have some things within yourself to overcome and some things outside of yourself which must be surmounted. But you can do it.… And often when you find the difficulties greatest and the hour darkest, the light will appear and you will see that you are free. Let nothing discourage you … he has chosen you to get Nam and go with the Master to Sach Khand, your true abode. You must reach there. Nothing can prevent you. But you can hasten the progress or retard it, as you like.

So our actions must reflect our spiritual desire. The stillness required to reach our goal will come as a result of our immense effort. The Master is waiting for us to come inside and begin the journey with him. This is a worthy lifetime pursuit. As Maharaj Sawan Singh says in _Spiritual Gems:_ “It is our job and we must do it; and we must do it now in this very lifetime.”

> Be still and know that I am God
> <sub>_Bible, Psalms 46:10_</sub>

> If you take one step to take refuge in the Master, The Master meets you on the way
> By taking hundreds of steps.
> If you remember the Master just once,
> The Master remembers you again and again. Even if your devotion is small
> As a fragment of a cowrie shell,
> The Master showers all benefits on you.
> <sub>Bhai Gurdas, as quoted in _Living Meditation_</sub>

## Beloved

> Beloved no fear if you break my heart a thousand times but do not abandon me in contempt because of what I have here become for in this garden every flower has its roots in dirt.…

> I assumed you outside of myself beyond the reaches of my imagination
> Now that you have dropped the veil I realize You are the one
> I left behind with my first step.
> <sub>_This Heavenly Wine: Poems from the Divan-e Jami, renditions by Vraje Abramian_</sub>

> Taking the all-important first step with a sincere heart can be a sort of enlightenment. It presages an evolutionary adventure, and offers inner peace.
> <sub>Michael Murphy and George Leonard, _The Life We Are Given_</sub>

## Book Review
**Buddhism: Path to Nirvana**

By K. N. Upadhyaya

Publisher: Radha Soami Satsang Beas, Beas, India. 2010. ISBN: 978-81-8256-920-1

In _Buddhism: Path to Nirvana,_ K. N. Upadhyaya brings to the study of Buddhism his knowledge of Eastern philosophy and the ancient languages of Sanskrit and Pali, as well as the teachings of modern adepts in Surat Shabd Yoga. Positing a universal need in humans to “unravel the mystery of the world and realize the objective of human life,” the author writes: “To do so, it is very helpful to know what the great sages, saints and Enlightened Ones, whether of the East or West, have said regarding these matters, especially regarding the ultimate Truth and the way to realize it.”

A former professor and chair of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Hawaii and a specialist in the philosophies of India, Upadhyaya explains the spiritual precepts of Buddhism with frequent reference to the most ancient texts of Buddhism, including both the Sanskrit and Pali Canons. He also provides numerous quotations from Buddhist spiritual teachers from medieval to modern times.

He begins with the Buddha’s life story, because this story “encapsulates the whole of Buddhist understanding.”

> While what is fact and what is legend in the story of the Buddha’s life will never be known, the Buddhist path does not depend on the historical accuracy of the story. The truths found in the story may not be historical, but they serve as metaphors, and through the account of the Buddha’s life and experiences, fundamental truths are illustrated.

The Buddha’s early life, one of privilege, was fundamentally changed when he encountered sickness, old age and death. He left his home and set out to attain enlightenment. After practicing rigorous austerities and penances for six years, he turned from these extreme practices to what later would be called “the middle path.”

Buddha’s pragmatic approach to teaching was characterized by his refusal to respond to metaphysical questions and his focus on teaching according to his followers’ spiritual capacities.

The Buddha’s teachings were transmitted orally for five centuries before the earliest Buddhist scriptures were written in the first century CE. Today there are three main traditions of Buddhism: Theravada, practiced primarily in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia; Mahayana, followed widely in Tibet and East Asia; and Vajrayana, thriving most actively in Tibet and Japan.

The Buddha himself clearly stated that the path he was teaching was not something new, or something he had invented. Rather, it was “an ancient path, an ancient way travelled by Enlightened Ones of former times.” With utmost simplicity, the Buddha expressed the most fundamental principles underlying the spiritual path as “four noble truths”: 1) life in the world is full of suffering; 2) there is a cause of this suffering; 3) it is possible to bring an end to suffering; and 4) there is a path that leads to the cessation of suffering.

The chapter entitled “Human Life” examines the Buddhist teaching that a human life is difficult to obtain and a precious opportunity, since “all is within the human body.” The chapter entitled “A World of Impermanence” stresses the perishable nature of the world and everything in it. As the Buddha warned his disciples, “What is impermanent is not worth delighting in, not worth approval and not worth clinging to.”

When it comes to subtle Buddhist teachings which many readers might find hard to grasp, the author gives clear explanations. For example, he spells out various implications of the doctrine of the “triple body” of the Buddha, the doctrine that all Buddhas (perfectly enlightened beings) have three bodies: the physical body (Nirmanakaya); the blissful or glorious body that exists in heavenly realms (Sambhogakaya); and the Dharma-body or truth body that is one with absolute reality (Dharmakaya). The author writes:

> Since all the Buddhas who come to this world are emanations from the Dharmakāya, the real spiritual body or truth body that is eternally one and the same, it is only the physical forms of the Buddhas that are subject to birth and death, while, in essence, they are undying and immortal.

In the Buddha’s words, “He who sees the Dhamma [ultimate reality] sees me.” The Buddhas and the truth they teach come from the same source. Upadhyaya states, “The truth they embody is one and eternal, and their teachings are eternal, and for all.”

Discussing the Buddhist concept of the non-self, he says, “According to Buddhism, what generally is considered the self is actually a conglomeration of constantly changing physical and mental constituents (_skandhas_).” Similarly, all phenomena are non-self.

Many people interpret the Buddha’s teachings to mean that there is no soul and no God. The author offers a different perspective on this question. His close analysis of Buddha’s words in the Sanskrit and Pali canons, as well as of the writings of various Buddhist spiritual teachers, is set in the context of what was meant in Buddha’s time by the words now translated as self, soul and God. Here, as throughout the book, the author stresses that confusion over the words used to describe spiritual experience can only be resolved by having those spiritual experiences oneself. He ends with the assertion, “The Buddha therefore placed strong emphasis on direct personal experiment and the inner verification of what is truly real.”

The chapter on “The Enlightened One” brings in quotes from many Buddhist sources on the necessity of having a living spiritual teacher. Both the teacher’s responsibility and the disciple’s attitude and duty are discussed. Taking refuge in the living teacher is like taking refuge in the Buddha himself, for, as Patrul Rimpoche says:
> The spiritual teacher is like the Buddha Himself. He brings us the transmission of the Buddhas of the past, embodies for us the Buddhas of the present and, through his teaching, is the source of the Buddhas of the future.

The chapter on “The Eternal Path” offers insights on the practice of the path, including the work of controlling the mind, the importance of reverence for life, vegetarianism, detachment, and the practice of meditation, including dying while living. As Marpa, an eleventh century Tibetan lama, said, “I might die an ordinary death, but I need not worry; familiarity has given me perfect confidence.”

The chapter on “Inner Experience of Sound and Light” presents Buddhist teachings on the reality that is experienced through meditation practice. The Buddha himself described his experience of a “splendorous light” and “resonant sound”:
> All the universes were illuminated by a splendorous light.… They became resonant, greatly resonant and resonant all around, and a divine sound resounded, resounded majestically and resounded all around.

Zen master Soyen Shaku writes:
> There is but one reality and we can call it by any name.… You may call it God or reason or life or suchness or love … but Buddhism has called it ‘Sound’ … and declares that all things are of one Sound in which every discordant note is eternally synthesized.

The practitioner must undergo training to know this reality. Junjiro Takakusu says, “We can say without hesitation that [Zen] requires training to hear a voice in silence.” How difficult is it to achieve? In the reassuring words of Soyen Shaku, “Do not think that this is too hidden and esoteric: only train yourself in meditation … and you come to realize the truth of my statement.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## The Bestower of Bliss

> With the Lord’s grace, I have met the Satguru;
> Possessor of divine talent, Bestower of supreme bliss,
> He is the conferrer of true knowledge.

> I was burning in the flames of desire, He poured the elixir of devotion
> And quenched the fire; I became placid and cool.

> He shattered the doors Of pretence and delusion That blocked my way;
> He told the tale of my true home And all my fears faded away.

> Deep and dreadful is the world’s ocean; Who could have dared take me across?
> In the boat of Nam, Kabir’s Master, the adept oarsman, Ferried him to the eternal shore.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

<sub>June 2011 3</sub>

## Edit

The mystics remind us that although we have taken a vow during initiation and have committed to practise a minimum of two and a half hours of meditation each day, this is in fact just the beginning

-simply the appetizer! For most of us, this may sound like an impossible feat. However, if we ponder deeply upon the spiritual path, and see how intricately it shapes our lives, we would obtain a better picture of what the saints and mystics are trying to convey to us and how it is possible for us to turn our lives around and make spirituality the dominant factor.

We are living through one of the most dramatic eras of change in human history. New technologies have changed not only the amount of information we are exposed to, but also the manner in which we build relationships and interact with the world. There is just so much more to learn, know and do. It is no surprise, therefore, that we find our plates overflowing. We are barely able to finish all that we would like to accomplish in twenty-four hours. We are constantly rushing about, guilty of multitasking when we know this is quite the opposite of what we are taught to do in meditation. In fact, we are scattering the mind even more. How then are we ever going to move on from the appetizer to the main course under such circumstances?

The answer lies in one simple word – ‘edit’. Just as passionate designers carefully select the pieces of their final collection, checking and discarding those that are not up to the mark or of little use in building the essence of the collection; and just as they scrutinize each and every model before she takes her first stride on the catwalk, ensuring that each look is impeccable and simply perfect; or just as a writer constantly edits his manuscript to achieve the best possible work he can produce for his readers, we too have to discriminate and edit our lives to ensure that it is taking us to our ultimate spiritual goal.

The process of editing our lives involves a lot of ‘cleaning house’ and decluttering. A simple definition of editing states: ‘correcting, shortening or improving material so as to make it ready for publication’.

Likewise, we will have to examine our lives to see if we have structured it with a view of keeping our spiritual goal as the topmost priority.

We would start first by examining our thoughts as they become the precursor of our actions. It is said that the mother of every action is, in fact, a thought. Are we constantly being bombarded by regrets of the past or worries of the future? Are we wasting time, thinking negatively about our circumstances and focusing on what it is we don’t like, don’t have or aren’t happy about? All these thought inputs bear great influence on the quality of the output – our actions. If, instead, we adopted an attitude of gratitude, and focused on everything we have been blessed with and all that is good in our lives, our positivity would greatly inspire our actions.

How are we spending our days? Are we correctly prioritizing our tasks in their order of importance? What are we exposing ourselves to each day?

Are we deriving inspiration to become better human beings and disciples? Are we devoting enough time to meditation, satsang and seva – the cornerstones of the spiritual path? The answers to these questions give us an opportunity to evaluate whether or not our time is spent in the most efficient and balanced way possible, giving due regard to our widespread responsibilities. We would then have to take the appropriate steps to clear and remove debris that we have cluttered ourselves with and make changes, or as they say in technical jargon, press our personal ‘reset button’.

This process of editing our lives both in terms of thought and action is one that is going to be ever evolving as we move closer towards our spiritual goal. It, however, requires constant vigilance to prevent us from steering off-course. In order for spirituality to seamlessly take shape in our lives, our thoughts, actions, activities and relationships must be fully reflective of our commitment to the path. And as we move on from the appetizer to the main course, we will realize that it is all a natural progression and it is His grace that makes it all possible.

> Most high, glorious God, enlighten the darkness of my heart and give me, Lord, a correct faith, a certain hope, a perfect charity, sense and knowledge, so that I may carry out your holy and true command.
> <sub>Saint Francis of Assisi, as quoted in _Falling Asleep with the Saints_</sub>

## Something to Think About

Take courage! God often allows us to go through the difficulties to purify our souls and to teach us to rely on Him more. So offer Him your problems unceasingly, and ask Him for the strength to overcome them. Talk to Him often. Forget Him as seldom as possible. Praise Him. When the difficulties are at their worst, go to Him humbly and lovingly – as a child goes to a loving father – and ask for the help you need from His grace.
> <sub>Brother Lawrence, _The Practice of the Presence of God_</sub>
> ---

Just let me watch my own mind for a minute. It drifts about, hungrily manipulating its own actions and those of others to feed one worldly obsession or another; with little panic crises of running wild, like a mad thing when my ego is roughly touched. It behaves like this because it is untrained to stand still for a minute to look through the bars of my cage and see the One who waits to allay this hunger with heavenly food. Really, at best, I am no better than a glorified animal, caged in my mind, without the sense to take advantage of the celestial banquet He is offering.

_---_
> <sub>Flora Wood, _In Search of the Way_</sub>

The inner world is far more attractive, and when one gets even a glimpse of it, it is like the man who has been climbing a mountain in the hot sun and is thirsty, and comes across a shady place with a spring

-
he irresistibly slackens and stays, and forgets his goal for some time.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _The Dawn of Light_</sub>

## To Do List

We are all familiar with the term ‘to do list’ – a list of things or tasks that we feel need to be accomplished during the day or even during our lifetime. But have we ever thought of creating a ‘not to do list’ – a list of things that we should not waste our energy and time pursuing? This does not have to be a physical list on a piece of paper, but more of a mental note that would help us focus on what is truly important in our lives.

Our lives are filled to the brim with various thoughts, duties, responsibilities and other assorted activities. In today’s world, we are all faced with a technology overload where we are bombarded by excessive emails, phone calls, text messages, facebook and chat messages – all of which end up creating a loss of focus and extreme stress in our day-to-day living.

Most of us go through the day in a multitasking frenzy, deluding ourselves into believing that juggling several tasks will lead us to accomplish more than we usually would. We confuse activity with productivity. We fill every nook and corner of our time with activities that we have convinced ourselves we cannot do without, leaving no space or time for us to breathe. Little do we realize, until it is too late, that we have wasted our time in fruitless pursuits, giving importance to almost everything, except the objective of our human birth. In the words of William Henry Davies, “What is this life, if full of care, we have no time to stop and stare?”

In _Treasure Beyond Measure_, Maharaj Charan Singh advises us to put our priorities in perspective:
> Ask anybody and you will find that he has no time. The labourer has no time; the engineer has no time; the doctor has no time; the industrialist has no time ... What then have we gained from all this progress, from all these developments? ... This is not entirely the fault of development. We have become prisoners of the things that development and progress have given us. These things were meant for our benefit, for our use; we were not meant for their benefit, for their use … I am not against modern developments and the present civilization.
> But at no cost should we compromise with the basic values of human life.

We have been given the gift of human life to realize our true potential, to take the steps necessary to return to our true home. In the words of Maharaj Jagat Singh:

> This life is but a link in an infinite chain of existence. The body perishes but the soul lives on – immortal, treading the path back from its painful separation and prodigality to its blissful return to the mansions of the Lord.
> <sub><sub>_The Science of the Soul_</sub></sub>

The Masters explain that we are essentially pure beings of a spiritual nature, whose purity has been obscured by the mind and senses. And we can only rise above these trappings of the body and the mind when we are able to concentrate on that ocean of pure love that is the core of our being.

> Concentrate on keeping your mind in the presence of the Lord; if it sometimes wanders and withdraws itself from Him, do not let it upset you; confusion serves rather to distract the mind than to recollect it; the will must bring it back calmly.
> <sub>Brother Lawrence, _The Practice of the Presence of God_</sub>

We struggle with everything going on around us because our attention is not concentrated on the Lord. From the time we were born, the mind has been wandering around outside, swayed by the senses. We fill our days with the to do lists of activities and we keep the mind so preoccupied, we are unable to focus on our priorities. This outward tendency of the mind has become a very deep-rooted habit. In order to bring our attention back at the eye centre, we need to reverse this process. And the only way to do this is by meditation.

> The third eye is the seat of the mind and the soul. This is the pivotal point that holds the mystery of life. It is from here that our attention continually descends and spreads into the world through the nine outlets of the body … From here every minute the mind wanders out. It does not sit still at this spot even for a moment. Its activities are legion. The ageless secret, the ancient wisdom, the path of the saints lies in drawing the attention back to this point.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Discourses, Vol 1_</sub>

Meditation should be the first item on our to do list because it cleanses all the coverings which have accumulated on the soul. It helps us cope with stress and gives us strong mental resilience to deal with the events around us. It keeps us from being derailed by external events and helps us realize that this world is but a passing shadow.

Instead of focusing on our problems, which are a natural result of our own karmas, we should be looking at solutions and moving forward. We should not waste our energies in worrying about things we cannot change, and should remain focused on the positive aspects of the path before us.

Our lives can be as simple or as complicated as we choose to make them. We all know that we need to do our meditation, that it should be the number one priority in our list of things to do. In fact, all the four vows that we took at the time of initiation form the forefront of our to do list.

But we also need to weed out all the worrying and distractions that can sway the mind away from its focus. We need to veer away from any activity that takes us away from our objective – these form the things that we should not do. How often do we walk away from an argument? How often do we criticize our fellow human beings? The five passions of anger, pride, attachment, greed and lust are all energy drainers that are designed to lure us away from the path of truth. How much stress would we eliminate if we were guided by such a philosophy, if we decided to devote each day to only that which is worthy of our attention?

> We have certain responsibilities and duties which we must do in this world. At the same time we should not get so much involved in these things that we forget the real purpose for which we want these things. These are just a means to a certain end. We should not be so much involved in the means that we forget the end. The end should always be kept in view, and what we should do is to try to achieve that end.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _The Master Answers_</sub>

## The Priority

> Maharaj Charan Singh

Every so often, disciples on the spiritual path feel the need to ask themselves the question: what matters more, this material world of phenomenon or the inner world of universal spirit? The mystics say that this reflection is an invaluable part of the spiritual life because it is our priorities that determine the success we achieve in our spiritual evolution – the importance we place upon our career and business compared with the priority we place on our meditation; the importance we place on satsang and seva compared with improving our social standing in the community. The mystics remind us that it is our actions that reveal what matters most to us.

On the path of Sant Mat, it is not uncommon to hear disciples contend that meditation is difficult. The mystics’ response, however, is always the same. They advise their disciples to approach it from a logical point of view – can sitting in one place, repeating some words be difficult? They explain that the difficulty is not in the act of meditation itself, rather, it is the obedience and the imposed discipline that the mind objects to. The real hardship, therefore, is the mental anguish that the disciple goes through when he has to choose between his spiritual life and desires of the mind and body.

But the mystics make it clear that this only happens when the disciple’s lifestyle does not revolve around meditation, and instead, meditation is forced to fit into his lifestyle. And it is easily proven. If meditation is done first thing in the morning, the disciple feels happy and everything is effortless during the day. But if for some reason he has compromised his meditation for something else, then throughout the day he is distressed. By the time evening comes, the mind is tired, the body is exhausted and he is saddled with guilt because he does not feel like meditating. And that is when the struggle begins and meditation becomes difficult.

To overcome this, the mystics offer a simple and practical solution.

They tell us to make meditation the priority. When one starts the day with meditation, the chances of struggling with the mind are less. Both mind and body are refreshed from a good night’s sleep, and one’s thoughts are generally more subdued. Also, when the disciple begins his day remembering the Lord, he builds a positive atmosphere around himself. He enjoys its effects throughout the day and it helps him cope with whatever challenges come his way.

The Sant Mat Masters explain that only when a disciple pursues this routine regularly can the mind gradually be trained. As the habit develops, the struggles come to an end and the mind begins to enjoy the solitude of meditation.

> Gradually, gradually, devotion will bring its own sweetness.
> <sub>Maharaj Jagat Singh, _Discourses on Sant Mat, Vol II_</sub>

The perfect mystics assure us that to be one with the Truth even for a single moment is worth more than the world and life itself. It is for this reason they urge their disciples to experience it for themselves. It is why they inspire them to not only persevere with meditation but to make it the most important part of their life.

For the true disciple, it is a simple proposition. He has made his choice. And when one chooses the Beloved, love becomes his ultimate power source. It lightens every burden and bears every hardship. It attempts things beyond its strength and sees nothing as impossible.

Fortified with such deep devotion, his only aspiration is to seek the pleasure of his Beloved. For him, there is no doubt. It is the only priority.

> Most loving God, I beg You so to preserve that I am not overborne by the cares of this life. Give me strength to resist, patience to endure, and constancy to persevere.
> Give me the rich graces of Your spirit rather than all the pleasures of the world
> And supplant all worldly love by the love of Your Name.

<sub>Thomas à Kempis, _The Imitation of Christ_</sub>

## The First Encounter

The first encounter of the Great Master was indeed memorable. Baba Jaimal Singh was taking a walk on a road in Murree, when the Great Master happened to cross his path. Baba Ji said to Bibi Rukko, who was accompanying him, “I have come to Murree for this person,” pointing to the Great Master after he had passed Baba Ji.

“What sort of a man is he? He has not even cared to greet you!” retorted Bibi Rukko.
“What does the creature know?” answered Baba Ji, and added, “He will come to attend the satsang in three days hence.”

As predicted, the Great Master came to attend the satsang in three days, after hearing about the spiritual eminence of Baba Ji. And Baba Ji’s very first discourse answered all the questions and removed all the doubts that the Great Master had been carrying in his mind for years. He soon made a request for initiation, which was readily granted.

Baba Ji remarked at that time that he had been holding something for the Great Master as a trust from the Lord, which he had discharged that day. This was the turning point in the life of the Great Master.

Henceforth, meditation became his prime occupation and Baba Ji’s darshan his sole passion in life. It was a unique relationship of mutual love and affection between the Master and disciple.

<sub><sub>_Glimpses of the Great Master_</sub></sub>

## Mystic Mind

Mystics, throughout time, have continuously given of themselves to their disciples, tirelessly working to save every soul that has been entrusted unto them. While most of their efforts to transform man into God take place in the inner realms, or ‘behind the scenes’ if one may call it that, a great deal of work is also put in at this physical level. Outwardly, the Masters guide their disciples by adopting several methods – the most direct of them being satsang, where grace and love flow unconditionally from the source. Amidst these waves of love, one will also find hidden a number of priceless pearls. These pearls of wisdom are revealed only to those who are willing to deeply inquire and investigate into the Master’s verbal message, where one will then discover pointers that aid in one’s transformation. One such tip often given is concealed in the word ‘balance’.

A pendulum bob that is elevated by a certain degree, and then let go, swings to the opposite side to an equivalent height, at which point it then assumes a momentary pause, and is then followed by a swing back again, only this time to a slightly lower position. This arc-like motion of to and fro continues until the pendulum reverts back to being motionless at the centre. One might be able to derive from this that with each movement in one direction, there is another of comparable magnitude in the opposite direction, which would imply that they cancel out each other, with the net effect being zero … and there is balance.

However, what is critical to note here is that whether on one side or the other, stability is only achieved when the pendulum restores itself to its natural position, at the centre.

The mind is often likened to a pendulum as it too swings from end to end, or to put it more practically, from one extreme to another. Just like the pendulum’s motion in one direction is cancelled out by its motion in the opposite direction, going to both extremes of the mind may appear that the person is in balance, but this is not the case.
“Being in the world, but not of it.” “The middle path.” “Anything in extreme is not good.” “React and rebound.” These are some of the common terms used by the saints that caution the spiritual practitioner to adopt a balanced approach to life while treading this fine line of a two-edged sword. But if one were to go deeper into this word ‘balance’, what does it really mean and why is it so important?

When saints use this word, they are not referring to a choice of lifestyle or behavioural pattern such as work and play. Instead, they skim the surface of something so profound that in its uncovering and understanding lies one of the greatest secrets of mysticism. This balance that is often talked about, in actuality, refers to a condition of mind that allows it to function in such a manner that it is continually in its natural state of being – remaining completely uninfluenced by thought and external activities.

J. Krishnamurti, a twentieth-century philosopher, aptly prompts students of spirituality by asking the question whether or not such a mind can exist which when occupied, will focus on the activity at hand, and once the task has been completed it will resume its natural state, unaffected by its previous engagement.

What is the mind’s natural state of being? Mystics have described the natural state of the mind as the meditative state, free from all thought while it remains absolutely still in total awareness. It is a serene mind that observes and acts, unsullied by any sensual or emotional conditioning or by any prejudice. Such a mind is a mystic or divine mind.

Thought, by nature, is divisive. With a single thought, the mind instantly creates a division within itself. And so it follows that with the multiple thoughts that man generates, he is creating innumerable fragments, where each one is trying to dominate the other, with the result that he finds himself in constant conflict. Chaos and disorder become prevalent, and every decision made is born of utter confusion.

As each part battles with the other, energy is continuously dissipated, keeping one away from having any experience with the Truth. What is in reality a clear screen, in no time turns opaque, and finally black. Clear thinking is then no longer possible, as objects are perceived the way one would like to see them rather than for what they really are.

Therefore, it is of utmost importance to regroup and dissolve the millions of thoughts that drain and waste man’s invaluable spiritual energy. This is no ordinary task, and is perhaps impossible if attempted on one’s own merit. Fortunately, the perfect saints, in all mercy and compassion, have given their disciples the tool of simran, which can be repeated throughout the day to minimize the scattering of the mind. Furthermore, it is also advised to live a simple life whereby the unnecessary stimulations of excitement that arise from the senses and desires are kept at bay.

With simran and correct living, the mind eventually returns to its natural state of being – in balance. And with more practice, it learns to maintain this state for extended periods of time. That is meditation. It is no surprise that the mystics often state that meditation encompasses one’s daily living, and is not merely an interval of time spent locked in a room in solitude.

From this balance and stillness of mind, one then lives and acts, and one really experiences what it is to be truly human.

> When the mind itself becomes sacred, then it opens the door to something that is immeasurably sacred.
> <sub>J. Krishnamurti, _A Wholly Different Way of Living_</sub>

The cessation of thought in this state of stillness brings about a deep-rooted and sacred silence that pervades the entire being. Energy that was previously dissipated is then gathered to summation and the mind itself is sanctified. It is in this very state of intense silence that one is ready to meet the Radiant Form of the Master within.

> My mind withdrew its thoughts from experience, extracting itself from the contradictory throng of sensuous images, that it might find out what that Light was.
> Herein it was bathed,
> And thus, with the flash of one hurried glance, it attained to the vision of that which is.
> <sub>Saint Augustine, as quoted in _Living Thoughts of Great People_</sub>

## The Magnificent Creation
**An Explanation by Maharaj Sawan Singh**

This magnificent creation – the sun, moon, milliards (billions) of stars, land, mountains, oceans, and all this universe – has not come into existence by itself. In this world of cause and effect, there is no effect without a cause. There is a doer for every act done. Look at this wonderful workshop of the universe. With what regularity and exactitude millions of machines in it are working. Everything seems to move precisely according to the rules and laws laid down by its wise manager. There is never any infringement of any rule. Orders are carried out strictly in accordance with the divine Word that activates the world. Every morning the sun rises in the east at its proper time and, illuminating the world during the day, sets in the west, handing over charge to the queen of night. Then lesser lights shine forth, as if to decorate the night sky with millions of small electric bulbs. See how the earth revolves around its axis so that the light of the sun may reach all its parts. Look at the milliards of stars and planets moving in their orbits, never straying an inch from their appointed tracks or colliding with each other. You often hear of your railways and steamers, so care-fully and ably directed by your wise engineers, coming into collisions. But did any star ever dash against another?

See how the heaven sends water from above to make the lands fertile. How the clouds bring water from distant seas, and seasonal winds carry them over long distances! How lands are watered by rivers and streams! How vegetables and delicious fruit grow! How the earth brings forth beautifully coloured and sweet-scented flowers from its bosom! All this baffles human intelligence. How beautiful and magnificent this grand factory of the universe is, and with what precision and accuracy does all its machinery work! Do you mean to suggest that it is working without any Engineer? No, my son, it is not so. There is an Engineer. But you will see the guiding hand of this Master Engineer only when you take a proper guide, and with a proper gate-pass, enter the office where He works.
> <sub><sub>_Call of the Great Master_</sub></sub>

SPIRITUALISTICKSc
**Going with the Flow**

<sub>**Honey, IÕm back from my doctorÕs appointment.**</sub>
> <sub>**Apparently, I have a kidney stone.**</sub>

<sub>**Oh dear!**</sub>

<sub>**Well, the doctor gave me some medication, and some spiritual advice.**</sub>

<sub>**Really? What did he say?**</sub>

<sub>**This too shall pass!**</sub>

## Silence, Solitude and Simplicity

In our pursuit of happiness, we sometimes experience the feeling of going backward. How many times have we found ourselves thinking, “I never thought life would be this busy!” We may even blame ourselves or be blamed by others for overdoing things. We fill up our social calendar to the brim and comfort ourselves by thinking we are leading a ‘balanced’ life. We all seem to be over-stretching ourselves. Is this frenzied lifestyle preventing us from achieving eternal bliss and fulfilment?

The Master always stresses on the importance of having a goal or objective in life. What is our goal? Financial well-being? Successful relationships? Looking good?

In order to tread the path of Sant Mat and not lose sight of our objective in life, there are three major requirements that the disciple must embrace. In addition to controlling his mind through meditation, the basic requirements are: silence, solitude and simplicity.

The value of silence cannot be over-stressed. Mystics and saints have laid great importance on silence. Almost every faith advocates silence, but modern man seems to be afraid of it. We are so accustomed to outer noise that we feel awkward if we are enveloped in silence. We see people walk in the streets with earphones in their ears, talking on their mobile phones or playing games while waiting for the bus or train. Even exercise classes today take place to the beat of the loudest music.

We are stimulated by the western philosophy of being on the move all the time – being busy bees! People often have the misconceived notion that being silent and still means ‘doing nothing’, and hurrying, bustling, frantic activity, and continuous talking is ‘getting things done’ and ‘living’. We are brain-washed into believing that we are not achieving anything unless we are constantly on the move.

Our day starts with the loud shrill of the alarm clock. Our eyes open, on goes the television or the CD player. We are bombarded with noise at the workplace. When we arrive home at the end of the day, we are welcomed by the sound of the television and chatting. There is no break in this cycle.

The voice of the Master can only be heard through silence. Sant Mat is a silent path. Mother Teresa puts it beautifully when she says:

> God is the friend of silence. Trees, flowers, grass grow in silence. See the stars, moon and sun, how they move in silence.
> <sub><sub>_The Quotable Spirit_</sub></sub>

The second requirement is solitude. Solitude does not mean being alone all the time. It is imperative that we stay connected with people and meet our needs.

> All the misfortunes of men derive from one single thing, which is their inability to be at ease in a room [alone].
> <sub><sub>Pascal, _Pensées_</sub></sub>

It is imperative to strike a balance between worldly life and spiritual life. It is not necessary to live like a recluse. Our family, jobs, relatives are all very important to us. But we should not be bogged down and over-powered by our attachments. Our goal is to rise above these and learn to appreciate and enjoy our own company. The ideal is to communicate with people, yet remain inwardly aloof and concentrated.

Solitude is very important for a spiritual seeker. It is, therefore, necessary to change our thinking patterns and alter our lifestyles, so that at least a part of the day is spent in tranquillity and calm.

Mystics have often advised that we should learn the art of doing nothing. It is only in the depths of silence and solitude that a disciple can meditate, fully concentrated at the eye centre.

The third requirement is simplicity. Mystics tell us that all we need are two square meals, a roof over our head and two or three sets of clothes. Instead we want seven-course meals, mansions to live in and designer clothes. In _Legacy of Love_, Maharaj Charan Singh writes:

> Simplicity doesn’t mean to live in misery and poverty. You have what you need, and you don’t want to have what you don’t need.

The truly wise will always seek to simplify his life. The media-frenzied world drives us to think that we need the best of everything available. We need to filter our minds and carefully decide what we want in our life. Satisfaction of our basic needs is a necessity. Satisfaction of our wants and desires is a luxury.

The path of Sant Mat teaches us that whatever we are destined for, we will get only that – nothing more, nothing less. Once we believe this concept, it will make life much more simple. And if our lives are simple, we would have more time to devote to meditation in silence and solitude.

## Did You Know?

There is no seniority on the path. Progress is not related to the number of years one has been initiated. Everybody has an individual type of load to shed, an individual type of karma to clear. After being initiated, some are able to clear it in one birth, some in two, some in three, some clear all that burden in the inner regions.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Saint Matthew_</sub>

---

From the time of initiation, when the Master takes over the charge of a soul, he is more anxious than the soul to see it installed on the throne of bliss and peace. Even if the devotee, through some chance, leaves the Master or loses faith in him, he, on his part, never leaves. He will someday bring the devotee on the path again. His mission is to take souls up, and a soul once initiated is never deserted. This is the law.

<sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _The Dawn of Light_</sub>

---

When we strive for spiritual development, this initiates a process of transformation of our thinking, feeling and acting; but we will experience our true nature only when, during meditation, we have crossed the threshold towards a higher level of consciousness. That is the moment when we will awaken from the dream condition of our earthly existence to a new, much more comprehensive consciousness, one that is frequently described in Sant Mat literature.

<sub><sub>_Adventure of Faith_</sub></sub>

## The Master Answers
**A selection of questions and answers with Maharaj Charan Singh**

**_Q: Master, why is Sant Mat and the experiences of the initiate so esoteric, so secretive? Why cannot the initiate compare notes with another initiate? It is my understanding of Sant Mat that it is_ a science of the soul; and any scientist, to test the validity of his findings, would like to compare notes with somebody else.**

**A: Brother, there is always danger of ego coming in. When you share your internal experiences with anybody, you are inclined to give yourself airs, and you lose what you have. Also, when people know that you are spiritually advanced, they may tryto take advantage of you, of your powers. Then you may be tempted and thus lose what you had gained.**
> <sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol II_</sub>

---

**_Q: If we’re faced with temptations and we do our simran, how does that help?_**

**A: Well, sister, what is simran? Simran is a means to concentrate at the eye centre, and we are tempted by the senses only when our mind is scattered. When the mind comes from the eye centre downward to the senses, only then are we tempted by these senses. When it is not scattered, when it is collected at the eye centre, automatically you will save yourself from all thosetemptations. In that way simran helps. It keeps you concentrated at the eye centre; it keeps your thoughts at the eye centre.**
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

**_Q: Master, do the children of satsangi parents receive your protection, and are they marked for initiation in their present lives?_**

**A: Everybody has their individual karmas. So even if they are the children of satsangis, it doesn’t mean they must be initiated.**

Those who are marked by the Father automatically come to the path, whether or not they are the children of satsangis. But if parents become a living example to their children, naturally the children are influenced and may become interested in the teachings and spirituality.
> <sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol III_</sub>

---

**_Q: What is the name of the supreme being?_**

**A: Give him any name. Call him God if you like. After all, the Lord who is remembered by so many names really has no name. He is also called the nameless one, and his abode is also known as the nameless region. The relationship of mother and child is that of love, and the mother expresses her love by using different names. But it is the love and not the names which form the link between the mother and the child. All these words are just expressions of the mother’s love. She may call him by any name or by a hundred names. The link is love; it’s the common blood they share. Similarly, you may call the Lord by any name. We have so many countries, and every country has so many languages. In one language alone we remember him by different names. Every name is good. Out of love and devotion you may call him by any name. It is the love and devotion that count, not the name. You can give him any name, it makes no difference.**
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol I_</sub></sub>

## The Arrow

The silence was deafening. Even as the warm breeze blew its jasmine across the distressed mind, it did nothing to tame the piercing pain that consumed everyone. There was no respite, only tears – for just as suddenly as he had arrived earlier that week on his visit, the Master had now departed a few moments earlier, leaving us to treasure those events for a lifetime. Beautiful memories of seva, satsang, of questions, answers and discussions, and above all of course, the priceless time he spent with his disciples during his stay. Wonderful treasures that inspire happiness and joy. But at that precise moment, so very painful. What was that bittersweet feeling of agony mixed with happiness, that intensity of pain wrapped around the pleasure of tasting the sweetest honey? Something had happened – it was an arrow that pierced the heart that day. He had cut through the stone walls of our apathy and indifference, of lethargy and carelessness, with his arrow of love and compassion. And now, even as the rays of the sun danced a beautiful ballet with the leaves and branches all around us, all that could be felt was only that piercing sweet pain.

The strange thing, and perhaps the greatest hint towards trying to understand that anguish, was the fact that it had appeared almost immediately after the Master submitted his thanks with folded hands, and slowly left the venue. As those first pangs invariably dig deeper into the consciousness, it becomes clear that beneath the surface, the pain is already there – hiding from view, soothed by the balm that is the Master. The arrow simply opens the surface to reveal the wound, and release the pain within. And it is no ordinary pain. This is a pain of a different nature, one that the mystics have called the royal highway to spirituality. It is the pain of yearning – the agony of not being able to be with the one we love.

At the very moment of the Master’s departure after any period of time spent with him, there exists an opportunity to be struck with that special arrow of love, that leads to this bleeding of our soul. The pain of yearning goes deeper into the very core of a being than any other experience in life, because it consumes the victim continuously until the desire is fulfilled. And its sheer intensity is nature’s subtle yet powerful way of impelling us to strive harder, to apply more effort, in the only practice that can bring us back together with the Beloved.

The Master’s motive is transparent. We have always been told that physically, he can only take us as far as the grave, and it is his spiritual identity that truly matters, for that is eternal, while the physical is ephemeral. One day the physical Master will leave us, and the pain we feel at these temporary departures today will be nothing in comparison to the pain that we will endure at that epic moment in our lives. No matter how intense we feel now, the yearning that we experience today with each interim goodbye is in fact mild and short-lived, but let there be no mistake – it is a gift.

Each time we are temporarily separated physically from the Beloved, and every moment we feel that piercing pain, there is an opportunity for our love to be purified in the fire of yearning. The desire to be with the Lord strengthens, and consequently our resolve increases to meditate more diligently. And this is the Master’s gift to us, just as Jesus explained that it was expedient for his disciples that he leave them.

It begins with the relationship. The Master befriended us, and from that moment, he has nurtured the bond between our soul and his. And it is that relationship, fostered by his loving care, that pulls us to where he goes – our source. Thus, as the longing to be with the Master blisters our heart with agony, it translates into something of unimaginable depth.

The silence was deafening. The arrow had found its target that day, and sitting in the aching stillness, the Master’s departure became his gift for each and every disciple. Pain was exceeded only by abundant sweetness, and amidst the haze of emotions, one thing was absolutely clear – that out of his love, the Master had gifted us the holy grail of spirituality – yearning for the Beloved.

> The arrow of God’s love
> Has smitten my heart, sayeth Ravidas, I can be cured of this pain
> Only when God, the elixir of life, is obtained.
> <sub>_Guru Ravidas -Life and Teachings_</sub>

## Remain Happy in the Lord’s Will

There is a story of a king who became a disciple of a dervish. The king, showing love and humility, requested the dervish to stay with him for a while. The pious man accepted his request.

The king would offer food to the holy man first, then eat afterwards himself. One day the king sliced a beautiful watermelon and offered the slices one by one to the holy man. He kept the last slice for himself to eat later. When he started eating the watermelon, he found it to be extremely bitter. He felt very distressed at this and asked the dervish, “Sir, why did you not tell me? You kept eating the extremely bitter watermelon quietly.” The dervish answered, “O king! Why could I not eat a bitter thing for one day from the hand that has been offering me such delicious food everyday? O king! If that Lord, who showers on us such beautiful gifts everyday, gives something that feels bitter to us, we must smilingly accept it because of the love and faith we have for him. I have been staying with you just to explain this. Now that I have done so, I will be on my way.”

The king requested the dervish to stay, as his company would help him act upon this principle. The dervish said that he would teach him the technique to worship the Lord. He explained that as the king practised the technique, he would slowly learn how to remain happy in the Lord’s will. The acceptance of the Lord’s will with love and faith is born from worship of and meditation on his Name.

<sub><sub>_Traditional Sufi story_</sub></sub>

## The Gift of Giving
> The advantage of coming into this body is that you can give. Go on giving as long you have the body.
> When the body is reduced to dust no one will ask you to give. O Kabir, give as long as you have this body.
> Do good to others, this is the fruit of this life.
> <sub>Kabir, as quoted in _The Labour of Love_</sub>

Once we visited an orphanage, and there we saw a little girl beaming with joy. Her eyes shined with happiness as she danced to the music that was playing. Looking at her and the other six-year olds playing, we wondered what sort of life they must have had, and what they had done not to deserve the love of a parent. Yet, not one of them expressed any kind of sadness – love and cheerfulness poured out of their eyes. We would never have believed they were orphans. With simple innocence, they hugged us, laughed and danced with us.

The happiness that we got by spending time with them was beyond expression. We went there to give our time to play with them but we ended up receiving a greater gift – the gift of love. It was then that we truly understood the saying, “The more you give, the more you receive.”

The saints have taught us to always extend our hand to give – whether it is for seva, family, friends or even strangers. Our Master is the perfect example of a true giver. His unconditional love is the greatest gift we will ever have in this life. He gives his life to us for the simple reason that he loves us – he does not look at our sins; he accepts us for who we are. He awakens us from our deep slumber and tirelessly teaches how we can become one with our Creator. He is constantly giving us his time, his teachings and his love.

There is a well-known saying: “God’s gift to us is life – what we do with this life is our gift to Him.” The saints constantly tell us that the precious human form has been bestowed upon us purely by the

Lord’s grace. They remind us not to waste our time, for it is only in this form that we can realize God and return to our true home. None of the other 8,400,000 forms of life have this capacity; we alone have this privilege. The essential question for us then is: Is what we are doing with our lives a gift to Him?

It is very easy to become self-absorbed, especially when we are inundated with things to do. We are so engrossed in our busy schedules that we often forget the simplest virtues of life. The virtue of giving consists of giving a little part of ourselves, which may require effort, time and attention. We have seen in life how deeply satisfying it is when we have made an effort to bring joy into someone else’s life
-imagine what a great gift it would be if we could do the same for the Lord.

Offering our life to the Lord as a gift begins with the little things that we might come across every day: taking a little time out from our busy schedule to help someone in need, like an aged family member who might be going through a major illness or a friend who may need a listening ear. In one of the organ donation documentaries which is played frequently at Dera, the narrator makes a powerful statement, “If all can give selflessly, we will feel more complete as human beings and surely closer to God. We are all His children. Let us give God, our Father, a reason to smile.”

When we give a little of ourselves to someone in need, we are given the opportunity to express the love the Master is constantly nurturing in us. Moreover, the saints explain the importance of our attitude when we give – we should give not just as a duty but because it is a privilege to do so and to always give with humility.

> Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.
> <sub>Bible, Matthew 6:3</sub>

> It is not what we do or how much we do, but how much love we put into the action because that action is our love for God in action.
> <sub>Mother Teresa, _Everything Starts from Prayer_</sub>

As we journey on the spiritual path, we gradually realize that every moment is a gift from the Lord. But the greatest gift that we have received is the love of our Master, his encouragement and his patience.

As disciples, we have a great responsibility to our Master. Are we happy with everything that He has given us or do we complain to Him when things do not go our way? How do we treat one another – do we truly believe that the Lord resides in everyone’s heart? How do we show our gratitude to the Master for the gift of initiation? The greatest gift we can give to the Lord is sincerely obeying our Master’s instructions. He has given us the circumstances to attend to our duty; he has given us all we need. The Master has told us on many occasions that the best gift that we can ever give him is our meditation. By doing so, we please our Master – what greater gift can there be than that? If we give him our effort, despite our struggles, if we give him our time, despite our busy schedules, if we do our very best as his disciples, then our entire lives would be our gift to him.

## Repartee of the Wise

One day, Alexander the Great visited the studio of an Athenian sculptor renowned for his wisdom and art. He found it full of little chiselled figures. He looked at them with keen interest and finally his attention was arrested by a figure with a covered face and winged feet.

“And what have you named this little statue?” he questioned. “Opportunity,” came the smug reply.

“But why have you covered its face?” he asked.
“Because men live so foolishly that they rarely notice it, as it passes them by.”

“Well then, why does it have wings on its feet?”
“Because once it flies away, opportunity has flown by, never to return again.”

---

A man was going on a pilgrimage to a holy place in Rajasthan. His friend asked him why he was going there. The man replied: “By bathing in the holy waters one gets a human birth.” Astonished at the man’s reply, the friend asked: “Well, brother, are you not in a human form now? Why not accomplish in this life what you hope to do in the next one?”

## Waking Up to Reality

The human mind is conditioned from birth by the external influences of geography, race, gender, parents and family, and later by the educational system, society and media. It is through this constant interaction that the mind comes to accept life as reality. Contrast this with the teachings of perfect mystics who explain that life is not real, while providing proof and giving the technique to clear the mind of its conditioning, thereby awakening the mind from the dream state humanity calls ‘life’.

From a spiritual perspective, it is reasonable to say humanity is blind. Man is born blind, and goes through life blindly, getting married, having children, growing old, and reaches the grave still blind. Our degree of blindness is proportional to how independent our thinking is of our conditioning. The poet, William Blake, eloquently put it this way:

> If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to man as it is, infinite.
> <sub>_The Marriage of Heaven and Hell_</sub>

Simply put, if you ask a child who has never left the confines of his village how big the world is, the answer would be very different from one given by a seasoned traveller.

According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, the word ‘perception’ is from the Latin root _percepcio_: the act of observation, a mental image or concept. The awareness of the environment through physical sensation, or physical sensation interpreted in the light of experience.

Using this definition as a basis, we can assume that what we know to be real is the sum total of our experience. What is our experience? Albert Einstein declared “Reality is an illusion, albeit a very persistent one.” We define our experiences by our conditioning.

From a mystical standpoint, disciples are quick to realize that we are spiritual beings going through a human experience, without translating words into action. Talking about meditation does not bring the results of sitting in meditation. We need to get past our conditioning, beyond our comfort level, to the point of inconvenience, if we truly want to attain reality. A disciple’s only worry in life should be when he is negligent in his spiritual duties; everything else is just a part of the karmic accounts he has to pay.

However, until we meet a perfect Master who explains our condition and enlightens us with the absolute truth, we have an excuse. We have an excuse because we believe that heaven on earth is possible, by changing the world with our idealism. We live our lives by the saying, “Where ignorance is bliss, ‘tis folly to be wise” – but at what price?

We need to distinguish between ignorance and foolishness. Simply, ignorance is not being able to fix a computer when it breaks down, while being foolish is thinking you are an IT expert when you are not. An ignorant person can admit being foolish and improve, while a fool remains content in darkness.

For a seeker, this parody of life ends when a perfect Master makes himself known, provides the teachings, and adopts him as a disciple, through initiation. Then things get interesting and the real adventure of life begins! The truth is we have no excuse because we have not chosen the Master, but rather Master has chosen us.

> The people who walked in darkness have seen a great Light; Those who dwelt in the land of the shadow of death,
> Upon them a Light has shined.
> <sub><sub>Bible, Isaiah 9:1</sub></sub>

It is clear we no longer have room for ignorance or disobedience, for we have been duly enlightened. Further, we have our Master’s pledge to see us through to the end. Maharaj Charan Singh profoundly states:

> Once a Master has accepted a disciple, he never leaves him but is ever ready to guide him on the path. He does much more for us than the human mind can comprehend.
> <sub><sub>_Light on Sant Mat_</sub></sub>

> There is hope for every disciple on this path. When the Lord has arranged for our initiation into this science, it means He wants us to come back to Him one day. And if that is the Lord’s wish, what power can keep us back here for long? It is only a question of time until our burdens are lightened and we are pure enough to stand in His presence. This is the greatest blessing the Lord can shower on any human being.
> <sub><sub>_Quest for Light_</sub></sub>

It doesn’t get any better than this. What more can we desire? What more can we wish for, having been gifted with the greatest blessing the Lord can give any human being – dare we ask for more?

The only thing worth asking for is perfect understanding of the teachings, so we can practise our spiritual duties to perfection; to help us absorb and digest the teachings, and put them to proper use. We need to know how things work on the path. Maharaj Charan Singh has called it a science, which means it is a system of gathering knowledge and organizing and condensing that knowledge into testable laws and theories.

Master tells us not to believe anything at face value, He has given the teachings and the method to test and prove beyond any doubt that what he has taught us can be put into practice and is true. Add to this Master’s guarantee that stipulates with regular and consistent practice you will get the desired result, what greater blessing could anyone ask for? A disciple has to appreciate what he has in hand and learn to use that blessing to his ultimate advantage.

After thoroughly understanding the path and its principles, including the law of karma and how it works, our undivided focus and attention should be on our spiritual practice and the importance of achieving the ultimate. All the rest are details in the Masters capable hands. Einstein once said, “I want to know God’s thoughts, the rest are details.” Getting to know God’s thoughts requires one to first merge into the Lord. Upon merging into the Lord, it would be safe to surmise that details will become insignificant. As the Masters have said, it is a science; guesswork is not an option.

> When you perceive His hidden secrets, give your life to God’s affairs and truly live –
> At last, made perfect in Reality, you will be gone, and only God will be.
> <sub>Attar, _The Conference of the Birds_</sub>

## Why Marriage?

One evening meeting at the Dera, a man asked Baba Ji whether it was all right for him and his girlfriend to live together without marrying. Since marriage has been devalued to such an extent, what, the man asked, was the point of getting married? The vow that was solemnized between two people as a commitment for life, that was considered sacred within the context of one’s religion, in these days seems hardly worth the paper on which it is written. Where then, he said, was the need for a formal ceremony?

The Master was clear in his reply. He said that by not getting married, the gentleman was simply avoiding his responsibilities. Baba Ji quickly put before us a vivid picture of the chaos that would ensue when none are clear about their responsibilities. We saw a world of confused and distressed people – adults and children – in which no norms could be established; a world in which everyone was going in different directions – each in the way he or she wanted – and no one was ready to compromise his or her desires. We saw a world in which everyone’s priority was maintaining his or her individual rights and personal freedom. But without a commitment to something beyond oneself, who would decide what was right? How quickly would such a world become a lonely nightmare of disappointment, anger, bitterness and frustration?

Marriage is one of the key institutions of civilisation. If we are to understand why it is important, we need to remind ourselves of two things in particular. First, no one can function as an island. Without cooperation and compromise, without mutually respected rules of conduct, who would decide what gets done? If I am going to pursue what I want at all costs, it may well be that what I want does not suit or appeal to you. Second, we have to remind ourselves of the simple and self-evident truth that nothing can be achieved without commitment. We have to put our roots down deep if we are to draw sustenance from life’s depths – and this cannot happen if we keep changing focus.

We need to think through these issues. In a world where values are not shared, on whom would we be able to depend? How could we raise children? Don’t children absorb their values from within the family during their early years? If our early environment is stable and positive, it nurtures positive values within us. Has the science of human behaviour shown us a better way to learn the important lessons of life other than in the context of a loving family? And in a world where the family unit does not exist, how would we transmit positive values from one generation to the next? Where there is no emotional and social stability, not only is life traumatic for the children, but it affects us too.

Our code of conduct creates order and stability out of potential chaos. It reflects our fragile spiritual understanding and provides a refuge from the confusion at the surface of life. By representing more than our immediate interests, it helps us contain our actions so that we can experience the deeper truths of life. The institution of marriage is a significant element in our moral code for it provides a structure within which to grow and meet our responsibilities. Our destiny has already been written – as Jesus says in Saint Matthew, we “shall not escape from here” as long as even one “jot” remains to be paid.

When we come into a physical relationship with a person of the opposite sex, when we act in accordance with one of the deepest forces of the creation and give birth to children, whose responsibility are they if not ours? If the union does not produce children, do we think this means that no responsibilities ensue? If we devalue the physical act of creation by treating it as a means of pleasure alone, then it can only point to our blindness: even if we do not have children, our involvement with each other runs deep through this union, so the consequences and responsibilities are commensurate and will surely have to be met one day. When we have relationships outside marriage, we are looking for the pleasures of a partnership without the responsibilities. We do not even give ourselves a chance to experience the responsibilities, for without a supportive framework it is easy to think they are not there. No sooner do we feel trouble brewing, than we are on our way – looking for happiness elsewhere.

It is a myth of our present times that happiness comes with the right partner. This suits the mind – it is always looking for variety. But we need to remind ourselves constantly that it is our mind that is our problem. It is the mind that prevents us from going beyond the physical. It alone keeps us from experiencing the inner music of the Shabd. Our mind is rooted in the layers of impressions from our previous actions and thoughts that sit like thick sound-proofing around our soul.

How far are we going to let it take us? And if we are not ready to make the commitment needed for marriage, how can we imagine we will remain committed to the journey of our soul that lies ahead?

How, without commitment, can we ever experience the depths of life? We will spend our entire lives skating about on the surface. In our relationships, we may not even get to know our partner before we get disappointed or frustrated and look to change. Our problems may well manifest themselves in our relationships, but they do not originate there. We do not see that we have got things back to front, that it is for us to find happiness first within ourselves, and only then can we _build_ a partnership of two happy people learning to live together in tolerance and love.

Marriage is a public statement of a commitment. By making our partnership public, we cement it. By institutionalizing it, we further cement it. No partnership is easy, and marriage is no different – so we need all the help we can get. Marriage provides a framework to hold two people together, so that in times of trouble they don’t split or drift apart. It gives a reference point beyond two minds, and creates space within which their differences can exist.

Some people may argue that a private commitment to each other is sufficient. In many countries this is acceptable by law, for taxation or other purposes, so who needs a piece of paper? But if we reflect a little, we will discover this is a way of avoiding commitment. Whatever the intellect may say, who would deny that legal marriage is a significant step, even if it is no more than the simplest of ceremonies? That is maybe why the proponents of this argument wish to avoid it: legal marriage _is_ binding.

If we look just a little beneath the surface, we will see that in spite of modern attitudes, most people are not really happy with what is known as a common-law marriage. The parents of the couple are often disappointed or unhappy with the situation, one or other of the partners may feel insecure, and the children are shy or embarrassed among their peers, insecure and fearful of ridicule. Like the separation or divorce of parents, it can be a private agony children harbour in their hearts, and they are powerless to do anything about it. Generally speaking, parents hold the key to the happiness of their children, and every society on earth recognizes this by having its own ways to establish a couple as a unit, the basis and backbone of the family.

Commitment, responsibility, steadiness, a concern for the well-being of others, all are aspects of love. Love, we are guided, is a _verb_ – something we _do_, not just something that happens by chance. How many times does the Master point out in the meetings that we do not even understand what love is. He explains how our difficulties arise because we confuse love with the physical. Love is beyond the physical, he keeps telling us; true love is constant and unconditional, true love does not alter with change.

We call ourselves _satsangis_. _Sat-sang_, ‘truth’ and ‘association’. It has been our good fortune to be brought into association with truth. In our essence we are the truth, the reality, for which we yearn. Call it God, call it truth, call it love, call it the Word; it is the essence of life and it is the life-force of you and me. By initiation into the practice of the Word, we are given the key to find this treasure within ourselves. It is for us to use the key. For this, too, we need commitment. We need commitment, steadfastness and courage – not every day is a sunny day on the spiritual path. We need to be clear about our priorities – but we keep forgetting them. We start to think our interests lie in our relationships, in emotional happiness right now. So easily we lose sight of the bigger picture.

By committing ourselves to live with one person, we give ourselves the opportunity to be constant and learn how to love. Marriage is

“till death do us part, for richer for poorer, in sickness and health”. As we live through the years in one relationship, we learn that human love can be transformed from the excitement of romantic love and the passion of youthful lust into a deeper sort of love marked by the selflessness, compassion and generosity that come with time. When things are difficult, there is only one practical option and that is to _work on ourselves_. To achieve harmony through the ups and downs of life, we have to keep on developing. Within a marriage we can nurture friendship, so aptly and beautifully described by Hazur as a relationship “where you have a clean and clear understanding with someone – he accepts you for what you are and you accept him for what he is. He wants to help you. You want to help him. That is friendship. It is very rare.” For a good marriage, we need big hearts filled with positive qualities – tolerance, trust, patience, compassion and forgiveness; our commitment leads us to develop these qualities within ourselves.

Marriage is a purpose-designed vessel to hold, protect and nourish earthly love. This earthly love is precious and sacred, not because it has been sanctioned by a religious organisation, but because it reflects the yearning of the soul for union with its source. It can shape the order of our world and, as it expresses itself through the love of parent and child or husband and wife, it is one of the best ways we have of making the world a better place. Rightly directed, it is the same love that will take us home. In the _Mathnawi_, Rumi says:

> Love is the astrolabe of the mysteries of God. Whether love be from this earthly side or from that heavenly side, in the end it leads us yonder.

Maharaj Charan Singh, after explaining at length the protective function of marriage for those with spiritual values, ended by giving us a simple metaphor: If we want the shoe to stay on, we have to tie the lace.

> If Sant Mat is followed with love and devotion, it helps one to become patient, tolerant, kind and in every way improves our nature so that we become better life partners and can render better service. We are taught to do our duty first and always as a loving service, and that also applies to husband and wife.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Sant Mat_</sub>

> Maharaj Sawan Singh

## Heart to Heart

It is said that Maharaj Sawan Singh never forgot a face. In the winter of 1933, he was on his way to seva when an old woman came and bowed at his feet. He said, “Sister, why have you been so long in coming? When I initiated you in the village of Ghoda Bhaka near Khanspur fourteen years ago, you asked permission to come to Dera. Where have you been all these fourteen years? I am glad you have come and hope you are well.” At the Master’s recognition after so long a time, the lady was in tears and almost speechless. Finally, she told him how domestic and economic problems had kept her away. Those standing around remarked that they had not even heard the name of her village!

<sub><sub>_Heaven on Earth_</sub></sub>

<sub>---</sub>

A group of satsangis from the mountainous Kulu region were given a group darshan during their visit to Dera. As it was raining outside, the Guest House dining room was cleared and rugs were put down for them. When Maharaj Charan Singh came into the room, everyone spontaneously started crying – it was one of those charged atmospheres which made your hair stand on end, so intense was their love and devotion. Some of them were permitted to approach Maharaj Ji to speak to him, but they could not say anything; they just cried and cried and cried.

<sub><sub>_Legacy of Love_</sub></sub>

## Book Review

**Nizam ad-din Awliya: Morals for the Heart: Conversations of Shaykh Nizam ad-din Awliya**

Recorded by Amir Hasan Sijzi

Translated and Annotated by Bruce B. Lawrence Publisher: New York, Paulist Press, 1992.

ISBN: 0-8091-3280-X

_Morals for the Heart_ was compiled by a disciple from notes taken during informal conversations between Shaykh Nizam ad-din Awliya and his disciples. It sheds much light on Sufi spiritual teachings, and gives a wonderful glimpse of how a great Sufi shaykh interacted with his disciples.

An extensive introduction by Khaliq Ahmed Nizami provides essential background about Nizam ad-din, who lived in Delhi from 1238 to 1325. During this early Mughal period, the power and opulence of the empire contrasted strongly with the poverty and suffering of the masses. Nizam ad-din himself had grown up in abject poverty, often enduring near starvation. At the age of twenty, he went to meet Shaykh Farid, then aged ninety. Reportedly, the young Nizam ad-din was so overcome by awe that he trembled and was unable to speak. Shaykh Farid looked at him and said:

> The fire of your separation has burnt our hearts. The storm of desire to meet you has ravaged our lives.

Only three years later, at the age of twenty-three, Nizam ad-din became Shaykh Farid’s successor. For the next fifty years, the khanqah (residence and meeting hall) of Nizam ad-din was a sanctuary not only for spiritual seekers, but also for the poor and downtrodden. Its free kitchen operated round the clock serving thousands of meals a day. As the _Insan-i-kamil_ (Perfect Man), Nizam ad-din was a model of the balance between the outer and the inner. “He used to say that what the

`ulama [scholars] proclaim through speech, the Sufis express through their behaviour.” The sultan punished drunkards, prostitutes, and thieves with draconian brutality, but if they came to the khanqah Nizam ad-din treated them kindly, often giving them subsistence money to help them change their ways. He said, “If we ignore the sinner and the miscreant, who will look after them?”

Just as Nizam ad-din was generous with the destitute who came to his gate, so he was unstinting with the spiritual seekers:
> Though the shaykh followed his schedule meticulously, he was always available to visitors who came to him at odd hours. One day he told Amir Hasan Sijzi ... “It is customary among shaykhs that no one goes to them except between sun-rise(ishraq) and mid-day (zuhr) prayers. But it is not so with me. Anybody can come at any time:
> In the lanes of taverns and inns of vagabonds there is no restriction – come, sit and be at home.”

Amir Hasan Sijzi began taking notes of each ‘assembly’ he was able to attend. When Nizam ad-din noticed that Sijzi was taking notes, he asked to see them. The shaykh then went over the notes, correcting them and filling in missing parts. The resulting book _Fawa’id al-fu’ad_ (_Morals for the Heart_) quickly became popular reading in many Sufi orders. Perhaps Sijzi had no idea he would be credited with creating an entirely new genre of spiritual literature, that of notes taken during meetings with the shaykh, which became an important channel for spiritual teachings. _Morals for the Heart_ follows the meandering conversations of 118 assemblies, each one dated, over a fifteen-year period. In these conversations, we see something of the shaykh’s teaching style. While making a point, he often interspersed a line of verse spoken from memory.

> The master began to speak about the discourse that one hears from saintly and grace-filled persons, and how such discourse evokes a pleasure that none other can match. For when you hear the same discourse from someone else, it does not evoke the taste for God. Who can match the person who speaks from a station in which he has been touched by the light of divine intuition? ... And then some verses from Shaykh Sa`di graced his blessed lips:
> Who else but I can try to talk of loving You?
> Since others have no basis, their words do not ring true.

Frequently, he used stories to illustrate teachings that were subtle and capable of many interpretations. For example, he told a story in which God sent a prophet to scold an ascetic:

> Go tell that ascetic: “What do you gain from those discomforts caused by your strict observance? I have not created you but for chastisement!” As soon as the prophet had given this message to the ascetic, the ascetic got up and began to twirl around. “Why,” asked the prophet, “did this disclosure make you so happy that you’ve started dancing?” “At least He has remembered me,” replied the ascetic, “He has taken me into account. I have experienced His reckoning, for:
> Even though He says He’ll kill me. That He says it can’t but thrill me.”

Nizam ad-din used colourful language. He called initiation ‘grasping the hand of the shaykh’, an evocative expression carrying a sense both of forging a bond of allegiance and of relying on the strength of the master, taking his refuge.

> “Whoever grasps the hand of a shaykh and pledges loyalty to him,” observed the master, “has made a pact with God! He must remain firm in his commitment, for if he becomes distracted from his resolve, in such circumstances on whom or what can he depend?”

Anecdotes were continually woven into the conversation, often about Shaykh Farid, revealing the deep affection between master and disciple. Other stories relate to various Sufis familiar to his listeners. Take, for example, the following account about Baha ad-din Zakariya, who later became a well-known shaykh in the Suhrawardi order:

> He had been with Shaykh Shihab ad-din but seventeen days when, on the seventeenth day, Shaykh Shihab ad-din conferred on him his blessings ... So rapid was his success that some of the older disciples took offense, complaining, “We have spent so many years in the saint’s presence and yet we had no such favours conferred on us.” Their murmurings reached the ears of Shaykh Shihab ad-din. He made this reply to them: “You brought wet wood. How can wet wood catch fire? But Zakariya brought dry wood. With one puff, he went up in flames!”

The normal etiquette on entering the shaykh’s presence was to kiss his hand. In fact, each session in the notes begins something like: “_on such-and-such a day I was privileged to kiss the hand of the emperor of all the worlds._” Nizam ad-din understood the human psychology behind the formal gesture: “_In every case,” remarked the master, “those who kiss the hands of shaykhs and dervishes hope that thereby the hand of forgiveness will be extended to them_.” Disciples apparently worried about their priority or rank to sit near to the shaykh:

> Conversation turned to proper conduct in the saint’s assembly, that is, how to enter the presence of the pir(saint) and locate the right place to sit down. “Proper conduct,” observed the master, “is that a person who enters the saint’s assembly should sit down in whatever empty place he espies. It is not fitting, at the moment that one comes to visit the pir, to be thinking: ‘Whom should I sit ahead of or behind?’ Wherever a person sees an opening, he should sit down, since every visitor is on the same footing.”

Though its use of Sufi terminology and unfamiliar names may make this book challenging reading, it offers us the invaluable opportunity of listening in on the conversations of a great shaykh and his disciples from many centuries ago.

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## The Greatest of These

And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love.

<sub><sub>_Bible, Corinthians 13:13_</sub></sub>

Faith, hope and love have long been viewed as the spiritual virtues that outweigh all others, outlast all others, and so should be those to which we most aspire. While there has not always been agreement on which is the greatest of these three, the prevalent view is that it is love.

One reason for this is that faith and hope can be said to apply only in the lower worlds, unlike love, which is the very essence of the highest plane of existence. Once that highest level – our true home – is reached, faith no longer applies, as we have instead certain knowledge of God’s love; similarly, hope is at that point no longer required, as it has already been fulfilled. Only love remains.

But while we remain on this earth, faith and hope are still invaluable to those following a spiritual path. Faith, that the Master is there for us and that God’s plan is being carried out even though we may not understand it, can carry us cheerfully through our troubles. Hope, that at death the Master will be there for us to take us to the Father, enables us to maintain a positive approach to life.

So while it is most of all love – and its cultivation through meditation – that is at the core of our spiritual progress, faith and hope can help us to be happy in our journey through life, and keep us strong on the path.

The development of all three virtues can strongly benefit all those in search of spiritual enlightenment. For this reason, all the articles in this issue of _Spiritual Link_ address in one way or another one of these three themes of faith, hope and love.

<sub>July 2011 3</sub>

## The Brightest of Futures

Even if from time to time we feel a bit lost, looking back we can see how the positive influences in our lives have affected us. It seems that from early childhood we always had a tendency to run away from the things we should be doing, and run after those we would be better off leaving alone. For most of us, that is the norm. Yet a desire for a higher, purer experience always seems to linger below the surface. For each of us, there are times when this desire emerges with full force, and a deep yearning for pure love and peace overwhelms us. We cry out instinctively for God’s love. And that is when the Master actively, consciously, comes into our lives.

Our contact with the Master is like being pinpointed by a searchlight on a dark night. At first we are amazed by the conscious attention that the Lord so generously turns in our direction. With his help, our yearning for the Lord can become focused. Through him we are conscious of a power awakened within us, yet we quickly learn that it is only partially awakened – until such time as we are able to exercise it. And whether we accept it readily or not, we eventually come to understand that the process of meditation is the only way to take the spiritual currents and focus them inwards with full concentration, thereby increasing their force and intensity.

**Our destination is determined**
Once the process has begun, we may wander a little from time to time, but our destination is now determined, and we are slowly but surely drawn into his sphere of attraction. As our feelings for the Master increase, they begin to propel us beyond the sphere of our material inclinations. Our soul is searching for the light. In meditation we become connected with a well of luminous energy inside ourselves.

The inner radiance we find inside has all the qualities of the Master we have come to know and love. Through it we are absorbed in powerful currents of spirituality emanating from the Lord himself.

Whether we are conscious of it or not, we are gradually experiencing his benign energy at higher and higher levels.

Though the spiritual call may appear to come and go, we are actually progressing all the time. Like a tree whose branches grow in the summer and become dormant in winter, there are times of great devotion and other times when we are totally apathetic. Yet every year the tree grows taller.

On occasions we get flashes of understanding: we feel that we are spirit, trapped in the body, yet separate from it. And we yearn for deliverance – though it is a slow but natural process. In the same way that electricity and magnetic and other forces exist in nature, we possess soul currents of our own. When our attention is focused on the world, they bind us to the objects of our love and affection. In this way our energy is always being dissipated and we have to continue to experience the world at this level.

**A touch of the soul**
But as soon as we manage to loosen our ties to the world, and turn our attention inward, a wonderful thing happens: the currents flow out and touch the ocean of love within. It has been said that the result of this inward focus is that a mighty torrent of intense love issues forth from the ocean in response, striking the earthly lover so that the two become the lover and the beloved of each other. Initiation is not the spoken word but a touch of the soul, from the soul of the Master to the soul of the initiate.

But the need to exert effort on our own part in order to achieve our objective is also very clear. From time to time, we each should look into this matter in the privacy of our own hearts. There can be no deceit here. We know what we should be doing and what we are actually doing. Perhaps we should just remember that we are now tied to a powerful current, whose force is constantly working to uplift us.

We will be badly hurt if we resist too hard. Better to suffer the small hurts of self-sacrifice and detachment than to be battered by resistance. Peace is within our reach, the end of suffering in sight, if we can just keep tuning in to our dear, beloved Master.

So although we are blessed by contact with a mighty power that will inevitably draw us upwards into itself, we should not be satisfied with an entirely passive attitude towards this divine love. We cannot afford to be complacent. And we should never have a misplaced sense of superiority simply because we are satsangis. We must close our eyes and ears and focus inwards on the Master in meditation. This is the best thing that we can do with our time. Love responds to every effort we make, and love’s response is the fuel for our spiritual experience.

We really must invest time in the practice of meditation. Each effort we make in this direction produces results. Master assures us that our negative tendencies diminish in proportion to the attention we give to the current. Like blowing on embers, attending to our meditation ignites the fire of spirituality. We should be in no doubt that we have the brightest of futures before us. We should embrace our good fortune wholeheartedly, and try to struggle as best we can to be worthy of it.

**I Believe in All That Has Never Yet Been Spoken**

> I believe in all that has never yet been spoken.
> I want to free what waits within me so that what no one has dared to wish for may for once spring clear without my contriving.
> May what I do flow from me like a river, no forcing and no holding back, the way it is with children.
> Then in these swelling and ebbing currents, these deepening tides moving out, returning, I will sing you as no one ever has, streaming through widening channels into the open sea.

<sub>Rainer Maria Rilke, translated by Anita Barrows and Joanna Macy</sub>

**I Believe in All That Has Never Yet Been Spoken**

> I believe in all that has never yet been spoken.
> I want to free what waits within me so that what no one has dared to wish for may for once spring clear without my contriving.
> May what I do flow from me like a river, no forcing and no holding back, the way it is with children.
> Then in these swelling and ebbing currents, these deepening tides moving out, returning, I will sing you as no one ever has, streaming through widening channels into the open sea.

<sub>Rainer Maria Rilke, translated by Anita Barrows and Joanna Macy</sub>

## Through the Eyes of Animals

We so-called humans are a species of animal distinguished by – and burdened with – self-awareness. But we are animals nonetheless. However much we regard ourselves as rational beings, we are driven as slaves by our instincts, habits and passions.

Unlike a lion, say, we humans have a mind and ego – the source of abstraction, thought, talk, worry, lust, greed and anger – everything that has led us uniquely as a species to nearly destroy our own habitat. But we are _distinguished_ and _blessed_ by self-awareness when it leads to our spirituality.

With no self-awareness, a lion is king of the jungle – he is no more and no less than a lion. You and I are at present both less than human and potentially more than animal.

**Dying animals**
In his 1928 poem _Sailing to Byzantium_, the Irish poet W. B. Yeats explained how we are immortal souls tied to the bodies of dying animals:

> … sick with desire,
> And fastened to a dying animal It knows not what it is …

From an animal point of view, we are in dire straits every day, at constant risk of death. Rumi wrote:

> Your fear of death is really fear of yourself: see what it is from which you are fleeing!
> <sub>R. A. Nicholson, _Selected Poems of Rumi_</sub>

And Maharaj Charan Singh said in _Die to Live:_

> It is very strange. Every day we sit in meditation and prepare ourselves for death, but when that particular time comes, those who have not died while living start crying and protesting and weeping, and say they don’t want to die. The purpose of meditating every day is to prepare for that time, to meet that eventuality, to go back Home. It is all a preparation, nothing else. When the Lord gives the opportunity now to leave the body and to materialize the effect of meditation, then we should make use of it.

**Thinking animals**
In trying to clarify what is a human being, seventeenth-century French philosopher René Descartes expressed the bleakness of the rational view of our humanity when he deduced c_ ogito ergo sum –_ or _I think, therefore I am._ He was saying that we are no more than thinking machines; that the language of our thinking defines who and what we seem to be.

Our heads are filled with constant chatter about family, ideas, work, country, ambitions, money, love, friends, poems, frustrations, breakfast … the stuff and the froth of life. We are at sea in the ship of our own imagination, defined by the language of our worldly simran. We are becoming, always becoming; never arriving; always retelling the stories that make up these selves of ours.

These stories describe the self as it strives to be a hero, to invent the impossible myth of our success. We want to be noble, to know exactly what is going on, to rise above our petty human struggles. But meanwhile we go on living our animal life.

The fact is I am my attention, I am nothing else. I am not my history, nor my possessions, nor my family, nor my job, nor my qualities or defects. I am just this attention that flits about like a demented butterfly. It flits so furiously that it cannot know itself, cannot stop to see itself, dare not be calm enough to understand its nature.

**Learning love**
We sit here, looking through the eyes of animals, but the “we” that looks is a constant murmur trying to make sense of itself.

What to do? In order to make sense of the murmur, we must first let go of the froth. And to do that we need a guide: someone who can teach us how to be still and silent, and how to speak the language of love, since that is our essence. Right here and now, in the middle of the drama of our own personal soap operas, we can reach reality not by pretending spirituality but by letting love unlock the cages of our mind.

Maharaj Sawan Singh wrote in _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol II:_

> Love is an innate quality of the heart. It is only through love that the sublimity of the Truth is known, because without it man would be in anguish.

He also wrote, in the same book:

> Every person cannot be called a human being in the strict sense of the term. Only those persons are human beings who have the spark of love developed in them.

In _Light on Saint John_, Maharaj Charan Singh wrote:
> The relationship of the soul and the Father is that of love … that is why Christ refers to this relationship of the soul with the Lord as that of father and son, also as that of bride and bridegroom, because in both relationships it is the love that binds them. It is purely a bond of love. And if we love the Father, we go back to the level of the Father after death. The Father has so ordained that we can love Him only through his beloved Son who is living in this world when we are here.

**Letting go**
The present Master has said that we keep a “House Full” sign over our hearts. We’re too busy trying to be rational human beings. Meditation is the only answer; meditation is where we bathe on the beach of his ocean of love. To let go of the self we must, ironically, exercise self-discipline through the purposeful utterance of the language of our spirituality: simran. One word after another, building that association, brick by verbal brick.

Rather than saying “I think therefore I am,” like Descartes, the mystics would say: “I repeat the five names therefore I am.” The language of simran enables us to be what we really are: Shabd. It is the language of love.

Simran is nothing but the practice of the art of dying. Nothing else exists but the words being repeated at that moment. Literally nothing. This is death. When nothing else exists but the name of the Lord being repeated in that moment, then the self does not exist.

The _something_ of our animal nature can become, in our human nature, the _nothing_ of the lover, which merges with the beloved to become _everything_. The Beloved – our Master – gives us the longing, the hunger, the desperation to lift us from our animal unconsciousness to the realization of our true God nature.

Baba Jaimal Singh Ji wrote:

> Always look upon this world as if it is a dream, and believe it firmly. Our relatives also are part of the dream world and are therefore unreal. Take the ego out of yourself and remember only the Satguru and the words of the Satguru.
> When everything – body, mind, wealth – everything belongs to Satguru, then all the worldly goods as well as relations also belong to Satguru. I am nothing. Always remember these words.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Letters_</sub></sub>

One of the qualities of love is the delicious way it dissolves the self.

Love merges the murmur with the subject of the murmuring, the beloved. There are no limits to the soul in love – it is the ocean.

As Fakhruddin Iraqi, the thirteenth century Persian mystic, put it:

> You are nothing when you wed the One; but you are everything when you become nothing.

**Animals learning to live**
When you are dreaming a dream, however surreal it may later look in hindsight, at the time that you are in the dream it feels as real as does the apparent reality of our waking hours. Dreams within dreams within dreams.

The paradox is that our mystical apprenticeship can be undertaken only while we live in the world of time and space – while we work, dream, breathe, worry, fail, fail again and fail better, bearing the grief, frustration, stress and disappointment that goes with our worldly animal selves.

The Great Master wrote in _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol V_:
> This universe is an ocean. The Master is a ship and He Himself is its captain. No one can cross over without the Master. It is only through His grace that we can meet the Lord.

The Master will keep us safe from sharks and drowning, so that we can journey across the ocean of karma to the end of the story, to that moment when he sweeps us up in his arms.

How do we learn to live in the world as real human beings? The Great Master gave us a hint about how to do this when he said:

> Love is another name for attaching the heart to the Beloved. It is not a child’s play. Only those of sterling worth, who are free from the ties of the world, and who are fearless, can become lovers.
> It is the work of one who is free from all worldly desires, and who is able to keep his mind clear of the dirt of duality. When the leaven of love begins to act, then a lover cannot turn his attention towards any object except the Beloved.
> <sub>_Philosophy of the Masters, Vol II_</sub>

_As you live out your desolation, you can be either happy or unhappy._
> Having that choice is what comprises your freedom.
> <sub><sub>Milan Kundera</sub></sub>

> Great Master with Dr Pierre Schmidt.

> But day by day, while yet I draw my breath, And day by day, unto my last of years,
> I shall be one that has a perfect friend.
> Her heart shall taste my laughter and my tears, And her kind eyes shall lead me to the end.
> <sub>Robert Louis Stevenson</sub>

<sub>14 Spiritual Link</sub>

## An Imaginary Interview

_Here is a piece of fiction which, in the guise of reportage, is able to weave together several ideas about faith. The quotes from named writers are from genuine works._

Shortly before his death in 2009, the writer Amadeo Esperanza, affectionately known to his friends as ‘the Monk’ (due to his marathon meditation sessions and penchant for jazz music), wrote a short note to his daughter Fidelia, quoting one of her favourite writers, Franz Kafka, in response to her worries over recent events in her life:

> Don’t despair, not even over the fact that you don’t despair. Just when it seems that all is over, new forces come to your assistance after all, and just that means that you are alive.

The note was a rare message from Amadeo’s solitary and contented life in a small villa overlooking California’s Piedmont Hills. Like all those who knew her father, Fidelia had grown accustomed to seldom seeing or hearing from him. He made no response to the countless emails and letters he received, and refused interviews. But this last note awakened in Fidelia a sudden urge to see her father and to record a lasting account of his thoughts on a subject dear to both his writing and his way of life. That subject was faith.

_Fidelia:_So, here we are. It’s so good to finally see you.
_Amadeo:_Are you sure you want to start with “finally”? You may live to regret it!
_Fidelia:_Okay, but I’ve started already, so I’ll just have to learn to live with the regret.
_Amadeo:_Ah, regret. Quevedo said: “He who spends time regretting the past loses the present and risks the future.”
_Fidelia:_Okay, hold on to your seats; he’s started! (Both laugh)
_Amadeo:_Well, you wanted to talk about faith?
_Fidelia:_Sure, but what’s that got to do with regret or risking the future and losing the present?
_Amadeo:_The word “regretting” evokes distress and worry: the very things which stifle our efforts to live in the moment because we’re preoccupied with the past. And this incapacity to live in the moment automatically affects our future.
_Fidelia:_So what do you suggest we do?
_Amadeo:_Let go. Faith is a slow process of letting go of all our worries and wants and learning to trust that He knows best what we need.
_Fidelia:_You make it sound like a simple thing. But I’m not sure anyone who’s tried would think it was so easy.
_Amadeo:_Let’s not confuse simple with easy: they are not necessarily the same. But sure, in this instance letting go is at its core a simple notion, yet one that’s not easy to follow – rather, it is a universal struggle fit for an epic story, which is why I warm to it.
_Fidelia:_I think the hardest part of faith is trusting in something you can’t even see.
_Amadeo:_You know, that reminds me of a funny story your grandfather told me, because I used to say the same thing to him and then he told me about the fish. There are these two young fish swimming along, and they happen to meet an older fish swimming the other way, who nods at them and says, “Morning, boys. How’s the water?” And the two young fish nod back and swim on for a while, and then eventually one of them looks over at the other and asks, “What the hell is water?” The water so entirely makes up the world in which the fish live that they cannot register its existence. Similarly, the divine energy thatsustains our existence – the _life force_, the sound current, the source; call it what you will – resides in everything we sense, but we lack faith because we cannot trust in something we cannot see! You know, my grandfather would always tease me if I ever lamented over why God wasn’t helping us through hard times. He’d say, “But young Amadeo, can’t you see the water?”
_Fidelia:_Yeah, he was great. But I’m not the small fish!
_Amadeo:_Yes! That’s exactly what you are. (Both laugh)
_Fidelia:_Okay, I think it’s time to move on. We’re talking about faith, and I think you’re saying we should just sit back and allow things to go where they’re destined to go – trying not to control our destiny?
_Amadeo:_I seem to have sparked a dangerous presumption.
_Fidelia:_How do you mean?
_Amadeo:_Okay, let’s use the familiar backdrop of writing as an example for what we’re discussing. Like any other discipline, writing has its own specific path. What is required to follow the path of the writer – justas for our shared spiritual path – can be split into three components. Firstly, there is talent, which is required of any writer. The degree of talent cannot be controlled and seems to be determined by destiny. Secondly, there’s focus: the ability to concentrate your talents on whatever’s critical at that moment – to sit at your desk and think of nothing else but what you’re writing. And thirdly, endurance: you must set aside a regular time for your daily bout with words, thinking in a long term capacity – you cannot write a long work if you’re tired after a week. Now let’s substitute those three aspects in relation to our path. The talent is the divine providence that allows us to attain initiation on to a true path – a gift that cannot be taken but is given to us if we are fortunate enough. The focus is the act of meditation and the day to day living within the guidelines given to aid our practice. The endurance is the longterm outlook and lifetime commitment to the path. Now, whereas the incipient rumblings of faith can exist before one ventures on this lifelong path, a true and unwavering stance on faith can be realized only after all the aforementioned work and grace take place. So your presumption in referring to attaining faith as an idle matter was a misunderstanding. The grace of faith goes hand in hand with our efforts to attain it.
_Fidelia:_I think I get it: you begin to let go by focusing on the effort and not worrying about the result. Ours is the effort; the result is up to Him. Amadeo: That’s it. There’s hope for you yet, kid.
_Fidelia:_Is there anything else you wanted to add about faith, maybe something from other writers you admire?
_Amadeo:_There’s no end to the writers who’ve spoken on the matter. But not too long ago, a former hostage, Ingrid Betancourt, spoke about her time as prisoner of Colombian rebels in a way that only someone who had been through such a profound experience could do. I wrote it out here (reads from his notebook): When asked why it is that desolation can make people believe more insistently in the human spirit, rather than abandon all faith in it, she replied, “Maybethis; I was in a situation where I had to make a decision: I could follow the path of cynicism, or that of some kind of spiritual discipline and faith. The first would be easy, the second very hard. The first is about ego, and what is happening in front of you. The second is about the battle inside you, beyond these events, that one that gives life meaning. I chose the hardest path, but once I had decided to follow that path, it was like having wings.”
_Fidelia:_It’s kind of hard to follow that with a question ...
_Amadeo:_Then I guess it’s a good time to tell you about something I wrote for you, when you first moved away, called “Vida con la Fidelia” (life with faith), which I never sent. It was after you cried over thephone for some forgotten reason – when your mother was still around. She told me not to send it, but to read it to you in person.
_Fidelia:_You never told me that!
_Amadeo:_Well … (retrieving his notebook): “Nothing is lost in the wake of the hardships you endure, because the meaning is in the moment, the moment is part of ‘the everyday’, and the everyday belongs to you and you to Him.”
_Fidelia:_Wow, I guess that really is life with faith. So what would you say is life without it?
_Amadeo:_My dear Fidelia, life without faith is different ways to claim sadness.

 i carry your heart with me(i carry it in my heart)i am never without it(anywhere i go you go,my dear;and whatever is done by only me is your doing,my darling) i fear no fate(for you are my fate,my sweet)i want no world(for beautiful you are my world,my true)

 here is the deepest secret nobody knows (here is the root of the root and the bud of the bud and the sky of the sky of a tree called life;which grows higher than soul can hope or mind can hide) and this is the wonder that’s keeping the stars apart

 i carry your heart(i carry it in my heart)

 e. e. cummings

## A Journey Into Faith, and Out Again

Just how important is faith? The world’s many religions generally demand acceptance of a lengthy credo of belief, and even Sant Mat offers a fairly detailed account of how the world is, or should be seen (in terms of theological and ontological structure), if we peruse the literature with that in mind. But ultimately none of those details is essential, because spirituality is a matter of practice rather than theory, and faith is secondary to love. What follows is my own experience of liberation from the bonds of belief.

I was brought up as a Christian in the Church of England, which can be such a liberal environment that faith is strictly optional. Often, all that is assumed is a vague sense of the numinous and a measure of sociability and social conscience. In many sections of the Christian archipelago your typical churchgoer is not expected to demonstrate actual belief. In addition, my parents considered a lack of scepticism to be in very poor taste and religion as something not to be discussed out loud.

Easy as that sounds to live with, I couldn’t get comfortable. As in many long established religions, structure seemed stressed over content, and the actual implicit belief structure, when I examined it privately, struck me as contradictory and out of place historically. So I wandered off into the desert of atheism, which although spiritually arid at least did not challenge my credulity and did satisfactorily comply with my instinctive devotion to Occam’s Razor (that whatever theory posits the fewest entities and rules is the most likely to be true – in other words, don’t ask yourself to believe any more than you have to).

I assumed that I had taken up permanent residence in the unchallenging land of smug disbelief, with the occasional foray into wondering. I stifled a vague sense of the existence of some kind of ultimate truth with the solid conviction that even if there were such a thing, it would necessarily be inaccessible.

Then by chance (or not) I came across a completely new approach to spirituality, one based on action rather than belief. And it felt right; so I climbed on board. I had, miraculously, somehow stumbled into certainty, a clear way forward, and hope: everything that I had never even dared to long for.

However, after several years the old discomfort started slowly to surface. Occam’s Razor began to slice at my faith; and certainty began to feel a little like credulity. At first I fought against this, but that just resulted in a sense of being at odds with myself, even of failing to be true to myself.

So at last I tackled it head on, and asked the question about faith directly. And so I found the answer:

_You don’t need faith. All that is needed is love. And even the love doesn’t have to be felt; only loving action is required. Out of that will arise actual love, and out of that love will come faith. At last understanding will come, and on that understanding we can build hope._

So now, I don’t ask myself to believe anything. Neither do I reject belief. But I don’t see faith as the starting point, the keystone on which everything else rests. I know that it will come, in the wake of love. And that sometimes it will go; but that no longer worries me. I can accept too that at times even the love will be beyond my awareness, although it will still be there. Because I know that all I need to do is sit down, and look inwards, towards that love. And that if I practise, it will come to me.

> Maharaj Charan Singh

> Do not spoil what you have by desiring what you have not; but remember that what you now have was once among the things only hoped for.
> <sub><sub>Epicurus</sub></sub>

<sub>22 Spiritual Link</sub>

## Do We Really Believe We Need the Master?

Do we really believe that we need the Master? Think about it. If we do, then _why_ do we think we need him? Or do we not consider the issue at all? This question is obviously a critical one for a seeker, but it is also valid for those who have been on the path for some time.

The proposition that the saints present is that we need a Master only if we wish to acquire that which the Master offers us. If we want to purchase vegetables, we go to a greengrocer; for petrol, we go to a garage; and so forth. We need to be clear that the Masters are continually offering us something, while always reminding us that what they are offering already belongs to us. We have but to stretch out for it, and it can be ours.

But if we do not want what is being offered, if we see no personal requirement for it, or we do not consider it worth the price or the effort to acquire it, then we do not need a Master. And unless we do feel the need of a Master, how can we follow his instructions, and become attached to him? We cannot.

**Hearing without meaning**
This is the position of most people. Even if they hear what the Master says about what he has to offer, they are not interested. They cannot align themselves with the objective to which the Master leads us, and so they have no need for a Master. They hear the same words that a disciple hears, but it means nothing to them.

So we have to feel the need for a Master. This feeling can come only from within ourselves, from a source of which we have no comprehension and yet which is our very being. The Masters advise us that this feeling is the pull of the Creator on the marked soul, which is ready to be drawn back to its source. How or why this happens we do not know. But we must establish a conscious need for the Master, because it is that consciousness which will be the prime mover in influencing us to take the right actions in our worldly and spiritual duties. It is that need which holds us close to the Master through thick and thin.

Where do we find the conscious need for the Master? It is in understanding what it is that he has to give and aligning ourselves with that as our objective. It is misguided to come to the Master looking for permanent happiness in this creation: we must be clear that the Master will provide us only with those things that lead us to Sach Khand. If we want the world, we should not seek it from the

Master: his shop doesn’t offer such goods as worldly happiness, wealth and power.

The Master is the provider of spiritual sustenance. He will help us to turn slowly away from this world, pulling us surely towards him till we reach the point where our love is so developed and our ego so diminished that we become part of him, and in merging in him we automatically merge into the Creator.

To recognize our need for a Master, the following steps may be taken:
-
identify as our objective the soul’s return to its source
-
understand that the Master is the only way to reach that objective
-
be clear about the role of the physical form of the Master, understanding that the true Master is the Shabd within; and
-
align ourselves with the will of the Master by following his instructions.

If we have done these things, then we are aware that we need the Master. And once we know we need him, we are more likely to make the effort to work with him in a team effort. As any manager will tell you, for a project to succeed everyone must share an objective and pull together. But it does not end there: we have to keep reminding ourselves that we need the Master, otherwise we subconsciously return to acting as though we are the doers.

**He never leaves us**
Once we have been initiated, whether or not we are conscious of our need for the Master at any particular time, the Master is always there. We may forget him, but he does not forget us. From the moment of initiation onwards, the Master never leaves us, for he has seated his astral form at the third eye. From there he oversees our lives in this world, knowing every thought, observing every action, influencing events in any way he sees fit so that we make progress upon this path.

But it appears that we do not really believe the Master has this intimate awareness: otherwise we would not think and act as we do.

If we truly understood that he is watching over us, we would always behave as we do when we are in his physical presence. But the Masters tell us we have only to go within to see that he is always there.

Our task is to keep reminding ourselves of the Master, for if our mind is not towards the Master then it is towards the world. One or the other – it cannot float in a vacuum. Characteristically, the mind has to be occupied with something, and so at initiation the Masters give us simran, an activity in which we can participate at any time. If we remember to do this simran, then we are reminding ourselves of our need for the Master, and that he is there with us.

There is a Chinese proverb which goes: “I hear, I forget. I see, I remember. I do, I understand.”

We hear and see (or read) about the many aspects of this path, but we readily forget to do what we ought to do. It is rarely intentional disobedience that causes us to forget, but rather the habit of the mind
in turning towards the stimulation of the senses, over millions of lives. Satsang and reading Sant Mat literature can help to remind us of what we need to be doing and of our need for the Master. But it is only by actually _doing_ what we have to do – our simran and our meditation
-
that we will truly understand and know.

**Get up and get going**
We need to get up and get going. The message of all the saints is that we are asleep. We do not appreciate the urgent need to put in an effort and so avoid returning here again. They tell us that there is no point putting it off, because it will only get more difficult. The same things have still to be gone through, the karma we owe still has to be lived out or else destroyed by meditation. It has been said that we as satsangis are like would be train passengers milling about on the platform but failing to actually get on the train, which then leaves empty. And yet the Master is exhorting us to get on, to go within.

Imagine an army embarking in landing craft, driving forward to storm a beach and establish a foothold in enemy held territory. The craft arrive at the shore, the doors go down, the soldiers stream on to the beach and come under fire. The natural tendency is to flatten oneself against the sand or hide behind any object. But it is accepted military wisdom that the forward momentum must be maintained, because once the soldiers hit the deck they will be pinned down and will struggle to get up again. It takes all the encouragement of the officers to keep the men moving forward under heavy fire, but things would be worse if the landing got bogged down on the beach.

Perhaps this is like most of us. We have been floating around on the sea of this creation for so long, but the Master has steered us towards the beach, where after initiation we land and engage in battle against the full force of the mind, our enemy. The Master has to keep us moving forward, otherwise we will become bogged down. We must maintain pressure on the mind. Once we have landed on the beach we have identified ourselves on the field of battle to the enemy, the mind. This brings us under heavier fire, because the mind sees that we have been given weapons capable of beating it. Battle has commenced in earnest and will not stop until we have won, so we might as well get on with it.

There used to be a charge in the British Navy of “reluctance to engage the enemy”, which could result in a court martial for a ship’s captain. It would be said as general advice to any young captain unsure about naval tactics that if he always sailed towards the enemy and engaged in combat, no matter how much more powerful the enemy squadron might be, then he could not go far wrong. The Admiralty would look favourably on him. This is what the Master too wants to see us doing: engaging the enemy of the mind with simran.

**Engaging the enemy**
Great achievements were made by outnumbered and outgunned vessels, through the sheer bravado of the officers and crew, which translated into considerable confidence in the outcome of battle. We should try to develop the same confidence and bravery, putting our faith in the Master’s promise that we will eventually succeed. If we engage the enemy then, even if we fail in battle, the Master will – like the Lords of the Admiralty – reward our efforts.

Let us at least undertake to put in what the marines call “a maximum effort” to be worthy of the great good fortune that has befallen us: the care and protection of a Master and the gift of Nam, not just now but forever. The Masters love our efforts, and we must fight to become worthy of our birthright.

Like the sea captains, we will never go far wrong if we always engage the mind with simran and do not turn our backs or lay down our arms. We cannot overcome the mind in one on one combat; it is too powerful. But if we swing our effort behind the instructions of the Master and use the weapons he has given us, there is a guarantee of final victory.

Success is certain, but we have to do our bit. The general of an army cannot fire all the guns himself; he relies on the foot soldiers. It is a team effort to win the battle. We must press on courageously with what the Master wants us to do. The path is about the Master and the Shabd, but it is also, no less, about our own effort.

_Those whose lives are fruitful to themselves, to their friends, or to the world are inspired by hope and sustained by joy: they see in imagination the things that might be and the way in which they are to be brought into existence. In their private relations, they are not preoccupied with anxiety lest they should lose such affection and respect as they receive: they are engaged in giving affection and respect freely, and the reward comes of itself without their seeking. In their work, they are not haunted by jealousy of competitors, but concerned with the actual matter that has to be done. In politics, they do not spend time and passion defending unjust privileges of their class or nation, but they aim at making the world as a whole happier, less cruel, less full of conflict between rival greeds, and more full of human beings whose growth has not been dwarfed and stunted by oppression._
> <sub>Bertrand Russell, _Roads to Freedom_</sub>

## Feeling Funny

**On the Write Track**
## Rapt in Divine Love

_Saint Francis began to speak of God so sweetly, so sublimely, and so wondrously, that the fullness of divine grace came down on them, and they were all rapt in God. And as they were thus rapt, with eyes and hands uplift to heaven, the folk of Assisi saw that the church was burning brightly. They ran thither in great haste to quench the flames – but coming close and finding no fire at all, they entered within and found Saint Francis and Saint Clara and all their company in contemplation rapt in God. Whereby of a truth they understood that this had been a heavenly flame, and no earthly one at all._
> <sub>Adapted from Franciscan Chroniclers, _Little Flowers_</sub>

This story describes the feeling of being “rapt in”, and aflame with, the love of God – a state that seekers of God wish to experience. It tells of a divine vision, something not often talked about, but about which mystics have written. Through their writings we catch a glimpse of being “rapt in divine love”, and we may be inspired to do our meditation so that we too may find such blissful union with the Lord.

The story describes a moment when the people of Assisi run to the church of Saint Mary of the Angels to put out what they think is a dangerous fire. Then they realize it is the fire of love divine and, as they see this, they step out of their daily reality into an inexplicable vision of the sacred – a vision so powerful that it transfigures, elates and lifts them out of themselves.

It must have turned upside down the daily grind of their lives, thrusting them into a completely different relationship with God. They would never be the same again, because, at the church of Saint Mary of the Angels, each person was caught in something that went beyond themselves. As they were absorbed into the fire of divine love, radiating from Saint Clara and Saint Francis, they came face to face with the divine presence and were passionately imbued with their _experience_ of the divine. They then had no choice but to begin a journey into the sacred, which Dante describes as:

> … a journey that gathers light from a descent into darkness, a pilgrimage of knowledge that penetrating deeper seemingly turns away from the light, which yet reappears – and yet again vanishes.
> <sub><sub>_The Inferno of Dante_</sub></sub>

After this they must no longer have simply had faith in the sacred, they would have known it to be real – in their bones.

Bulleh Shah, the seventeenth century mystic, wrote wonderful poems (published by RSSB in the book of the same name), describing his inner experiences of the divine, such as _Ishq di navion navin bahar_ (Ever fresh spring of love):

> When I grasped the hint of love,
> I banished ‘mine’ and ‘thine’ from me. I was cleansed within and without.
> Now, wherever I look, the Beloved pervades. Ever new, ever fresh, is the spring of love!

Writings such as this show how mystics experience a truth that is beyond the grasp of the mind. The mystic speaks with God and is in the direct presence of God. This is the inner truth found by those who practise a meditative path that leads through love to the inner vision of the Radiant Form of the Beloved. This makes the experience a very personal relationship: there is simply God and oneself.

A fourteenth century monk, Kallistos Kataphygiotis, said: “The most important thing that happens between God and the world is learning to love and be loved.” Mystics have come into the world to remind us that God is love, and that the only way to draw close to God is to learn to love and (which is often overlooked) _to be loved._

In Christianity, God sent his son Jesus Christ to teach us to “love one another” and to know that God is love. In the teachings of Sant Mat, Masters have come into the world to guide us towards reuniting with God through love and devotion to the invisible life force, the Shabd, manifested through sound and light.

**In search of divine love**
Through all the ages people have sought to unite with God. The plethora of religions, philosophies and spiritual practices that exist in the world today are evidence of this. Those initiated into Sant Mat are asked to meditate for two and a half hours every day, to lead an ethical life, to refrain from eating animals, and not to take any habit forming abusive substances such as drugs or alcohol.

Sometimes we struggle to keep to the principles of our spiritual path. So how would it be, if each of us were able to find a little of the intensity of devotion revealed by the mystics? And what if we could identify those characteristics that connect them to the divine? Could we then hope to emulate them and become a little like Saint Francis and Saint Clara, who experienced the “fullness of divine grace” and “were all rapt in God”?

Those who have sat at the feet of a Master have glimpses of being wrapped up in divine love. When we sit below the dais at Dera or in a meeting hall, and experience his _darshan_ or _drishti_ (that intensity of divine love which flows from his eyes), within these moments we too are “rapt in God”. These are the diamonds that we treasure. We savour each connection with the external Master, trying to transform it into an internal experience that helps us in our journey towards God. We use these experiences to help us to focus during our daily meditation.

Meditation is quite simple: you sit down, close your eyes, do your simran, concentrate, look into the darkness, then look for the light and listen for the sound for two and a half hours! But we find that meditation demands a lot more preparation than at first we might think. The preparation is how well we follow the principles. The weaker we are in following them, the poorer the meditation; the more we follow them exactly, the stronger the meditation. Preparation relies on living the principles with integrity.

This is because the path to God is a path of love, and the four principles are the means through which we express and practise our love for the Master, for God and for the Shabd. Love demands many things of us, and one of the most important is commitment.

**Making a commitment to love**
Commitment means that you have promised to do something; that you have dedicated yourself to an activity or cause; that you are willing to do something that may restrict you from doing something else you might want to do. Commitment involves choice, and sacrifice, and sometimes suffering. The mystics show us this.

We often use the word ‘commitment’ when we talk about relationships and getting married. Marriage demands a lot of attention from us, a lot of concentration, as well as a certain amount of courage and perseverance to keep it going; but most of all it involves love and commitment – with all its dedication and promises of selflessness and sacrifice made at the marriage ceremony.

The spiritual path is very similar to marriage: it calls on us to practise love daily. It is a sacred practice for which we prepare ourselves, to which we commit ourselves and which we put into action in the way we live our lives, in order to learn how to love – to love ourselves, our families, our neighbours, the creation and its creator.

This living experience of love wraps us up in the divine, and guides us towards spiritual maturity. This daily practice creates a flame of love, a fire that keeps us going and keeps the world alive.

But how can we, mere human beings, aspire to this? First, we look to the mystics to see how they do it – perhaps we are drawn to a living spiritual teacher – and then, step by step, we appropriately try to apply the methods they give us, the attributes they reveal to us, and practise these in our householders’ lives. We try to commit to those principles and actions that lead us towards, rather than away from, God.

But often we don’t see what is right under our noses. We easily take for granted those close to us, rather than cherishing their positive attributes and showing compassion for what we perceive as their faults. If we take a leaf out of the mystics’ book, we would teach ourselves to look for those qualities in others that we perceive ourselves to lack, and set about learning how to grow them for ourselves, rather than indulging in criticism.

**Fostering spiritual independence**
We can also fail to see clearly sometimes because of the habits of thought ingrained in us through our upbringing. It is an essential part of one’s journey to God realization to reexamine one’s culture in order to make up one’s mind about what is important for spiritual understanding. It is easy to believe unquestioningly what one has been taught by family, school, state or priest.

Emphasizing how important it is for disciples to stand on their own feet and think for themselves, Anthony de Mello, a Jesuit priest and author, describes in his story “Adulthood” what a master said to a disciple who was always praying to God for help:

> “When will you stop leaning on God and stand on your own two feet?”
> The disciple was astonished. “But you are the one who taught us to look on God as Father!”
> “When will you learn that a father isn’t someone you can lean on but someone who rids you of your tendency to lean?”

As de Mello points out, God is a guide, a mentor who rids you of your tendency to throw everything into his lap saying, “You do it for me, God.” God does not create dependency! He directs us towards being independent, standing on our own two feet so that we can be mature and surrender to him through this maturity.

It is part of spiritual maturity to be able to grow from one’s experiences and to develop an awareness of what one is in life and where one is going. We need to prioritize our most important value. Do we truly seek God realization, or do we just want a benign heavenly father/mother to look after us?

**Learning to know oneself**
Facing this question puts us is in a better position to choose consciously to commit to and sort out what we truly believe, and to put in the effort in to make it happen. Then we are on the journey to being true to ourselves and to surrendering to the Master. In other words, as the wise and loving father Polonius said to his only son, who was leaving his family to make his way in the world:

> This above all, – to thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.
> <sub>William Shakespeare, _Hamlet_</sub>

In this roundabout way one begins to realize that the striking aspect of mystics is their ability to be true to themselves – which, as Socrates observed, is only possible if one knows oneself!

Knowing oneself is not a new idea. Centuries earlier in India, the epitome of Vedic thought was (and it still is) that everyone should seek to know one thing, knowing which, all else is known. They say: seek to know the inner self. To be true to yourself is to seek the inner self.

Do the mystics know themselves? We can judge from their words.

Kabir said:

> When I sought within my body I realized my true self;
> ... By knowing my self, I became lost In the bliss of divine love.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

To have this kind of self knowledge is to be closely attuned to God. To be committed like a warrior, with steely determination to live the four principles, is to be in tune with the Shabd. Being in tune with the Shabd and the Shabd Master within and without is to be like Saint Francis and Saint Clara, who were so rapt in the divine. This is the purpose of all spiritual practice. As the mystics poignantly show us, attunement is brought about by complete surrender to the Beloved.

> Great Master at Kalu-ki-Bar.

> Faith as the fulfilment of life is really the same thing as trust.
> And trust is one of the fundamental aspects of life for every human existence.… Only trust allows the soul room to breathe.
> <sub>Wolfhart Pannenberg, _The Apostles’ Creed_</sub>

<sub>July 2011 37</sub>

## Hopeful House

“You’ve heard of Heartbreak Hotel, haven’t you?
“It’s where the broken hearted lovers go (they cry there in the gloom). Of course, we don’t put satsangis there. There’s no call for it.
“But I’m rushing on … forgive me. Let me introduce myself. I’m your tour operator; here’s my card and there’s my name:

Mr I. Focus, that’s me. I arrange travel to the Inward Isle and organize the accommodation along the way.

“That mention of Heartbreak Hotel just now – that was just a joke! (Don’t mistake me, I love my job, my boss and his customers, but

I have to look on the funny side of things sometimes.) Actually, that particular hotel is owned by Worldly Love and it’s not on a very good side of town. My boss’s company, Spiritual Departures, is based in a much better district, in Discipleship actually, which is altogether preferable.

“One of the hotels we use a lot in Discipleship is Longing Lodge, right next to the airport. We put our most serious clients there, I would say. They generally arrive in Longing Lodge when they’re ready for the trip across the sea to The Beloved’s Arms, which is actually our destination on the Inward Isle. It’s a wonderful view as you come in on the plane. Yes, it’s our final destination and a most desirable one. My responsibility certainly ends then, as the host there personally arranges for onward travel into the high peaks. No, I can’t really describe The Beloved’s Arms on Inward Isle. You’ll have to go there, you really will, and see for yourself.
“What did you say your name was? Mr Try-Hard? Well, Mr Try-Hard, I’m putting you, as is usual with newcomers, into Hopeful

House for a while. You’ll be taken from Hopeful House by helicopter to Longing Lodge when you’re ready.

“Now, and this is the funny thing: I just can’t say when ‘ready’ will be! You see, it’s so much up to you. What I can tell you is that we have some rather erratic guests in Hopeful House. Just a few come in, register, go straight upstairs (with no fuss at all) to the helipad on the roof and get the next flight out. But the others … well, all I can say is that they’re a constant surprise.
“We have many people who (believe it or not) make the effort time after time to get to the roof – and it’s not an easy climb – but who never stay long enough to get into the helicopter. I’m waiting there with my list (I have to check off the names, you see), I turn my back – only for a moment – and when I turn back they’ve gone. Yes, literally gone!
“I find them a few minutes later asleep on the stairs or calling up a friend on the phone, even playing cricket in the garden. They’ve completely forgotten what they set out to do – until the next day, when up they come again, only to disappear the moment I take my eye off them.
“Oh, it’s a very difficult job I’ve got. I’ve known some people spend half a lifetime in these antics – yes, half a lifetime. So, Mr Try-Hard, my advice is: if you get near the rooftop, hang on to me, do!
“Mind you, not everyone even gets as far as the rooftop. There are some who book into the hotel and seem keen but then spend a lot of time sitting on the stairs. Why? Well, that’s a good question. It’s a comfortable staircase, I suppose. They see a reassuring bit of sky up above, and they settle down and make do with that. Perhaps they like imagining the trip rather than making that little bit of effort to actually do it. Someone even wrote a travel manual describing it all, from the stairs. Believe it or not, he’d never made the trip, just used to climb to the landing every day and head back down in the evening.
“Then there’s the luggage – stacks and stacks of it, getting stuck round the bends, and of course I have to tell them that they can’t bring it on board the helicopter. ‘Miss Preoccupied,’ I was saying only yesterday, ‘please open this bag and let me have a look. My dear, you are really not going to need all this stuff. Please leave behind your righteous indignation, your gossip, and all those worries; and there’s an awful lot of daydreams here that are not going to be allowed in the air with you.’
“But would she let go? No, she would not. In the end she couldn’t stagger with them to the top. She’ll be back, I’m sure.… The only trouble is, I’ve just seen her taking it all out of one bag and stuffing it into another – she doesn’t seem to realize that having an expensive bag and a new label on the luggage isn’t going to change anything.
“What’s that? You’re asking me what you _should_ take? Well, since you ask, I would say: almost nothing. Carry nothing, Mr Try-Hard, but choose what you wear with care. Humility makes the best undergarment, worn close to the skin, whatever you put on top.

Detachment for your topcoat, I would say, but fill the pockets with kindness and remember that a lightweight suit of steady application should definitely be the basis of your wardrobe. Your hat, your scarf and your gloves should be of that incomparable fabric, devotion to guru, and finally, ‘Love’ trainers will give a lift like nothing else can.

“Come on, Mr Try-Hard, I’m beginning to have high hopes for you.

Here we are at Hopeful House. You can do it, you know; you really can. I’ll give you a little time to acclimatize, and I’ll see you presently on the roof. Don’t worry if it takes a while to get your bearings. I’m always waiting, and you’ll always find me at the top of those stairs just as soon as you’re ready.

“Au revoir!”

## The Question of Faith

_The Radha Soami faith is purely for the uplift of souls…. Please try to understand that when a soul is initiated – and if after that it keeps in faith and does not fall into bad habits and do foul deeds, but for certain reasons had not the opportunity of doing the spiritual exercises and progressing – it is, after death, stopped at the first or second stage, according to its karma and desires. There it takes to the spiritual practice and then in time it is taken upward. Rebirth in this world is only for those who have lost faith, do foul deeds and have very low desires. The second birth in this world is then given in such a place that they have the opportunity of meeting the Satguru of that time and doing the spiritual exercises._
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _The Dawn of Light_</sub>

This letter from _The Dawn of Light_ shows strikingly the significance of faith in Sant Mat. But what does the Great Master mean here by the word “faith”? In fact, he uses the word in two different senses: the first time it denotes a spiritual way of life; but when he talks about keeping or losing faith he means trust or confidence in the Satguru and his teachings.

Maharaj Charan Singh used to quote Jesus Christ’s saying that “to sin against the Holy Ghost can never be forgiven”. Hazur Maharaj Ji would explain that the “holy ghost” is the Shabd, an aspect of God that permeates the entire creation and with which we have lost touch during the long ages we have been incarnating down here. He would then go on to describe how saints are sent by the Supreme Lord into this creation to reach out to those souls who will be receptive to them, with the aim of reconnecting those souls to the Shabd or Holy Spirit within. This reconnection gives the soul the nourishment, indeed the life, that it has been missing for so long, and it takes place when the Master gives the soul initiation. A soul thus blessed is urged to turn this gift to practical use, by devotion to meditation as taught at initiation.

Hazur Maharaj Ji used to emphasize that meditation should be the post-initiation cornerstone of every satsangi’s life. Yet when satsangis confessed that their efforts at meditation were neither as ardent nor as successful as they would like and expressed anxiety that some awful punishment would befall them, he would reply that there could hardly be any greater punishment than missing the company of the Master through lack of effort at meditation. He said that it was not a matter of reprimand or chastisement but rather of a missed opportunity that would never come again. So that “sin” could never be “forgiven” because one could not turn the clock back and do what one had once failed to do. Our Masters frequently remind us that having a human life is a rare privilege, does not last as long as we imagine it will when we are very young, and is an opportunity not to be squandered.

Yet although we hear this advice and believe it intellectually – we know it makes sense – being able to live in accordance with that advice is not so easy. Quite simply, our attraction is still mostly for this world: we perceive it with all the senses and it is what we are used to; even if life here is hard, we cannot picture existence on any other level. We have no “evidence” for it. The Great Master understood this, for in letter 68 in _The Dawn of Light_ he wrote: “Faith, unsupported by direct evidence from within, should not be put to very severe tests, for it is shaky.”

A little later in the same letter, he says: “I am glad to learn that in your illness … you had no dread or fear of going out of life and bore the disease with unshaken faith in His goodness. It is one of the signs of devotion that the mind should remain steady in pain and pleasure.”

This provides an insight into how crucial faith is in the life of a satsangi – trust in the Master is core to our devotion to the Master and to our meditation, and Masters say that meditation should be at the centre of the satsangi’s life. The present Master has sharpened our awareness of this spiritual duty by explaining repeatedly that we must first establish a clear goal in life and then set our priorities, so that we shape our lives to ensure we never lose sight of that goal. The immediate target is to reach the eye centre, in order to come to the place where we may meet the inner Master and thus obtain some “direct evidence from within”. This is not just a meeting: it is a reunion that will give us, at the eye centre, complete peace and bliss.

This life goal must be clearly set, because it may feel elusive and we may appear not to get the kind of direct reward for our efforts that we are used to in earthly life. The Great Master recognized this in letter 66 in _The Dawn of Light:_

> The determination and faith should be so strong that even if nothing comes out of it until the last moment of life, there is no wavering of faith. There is no other way to rise up besides this. Let one seek and inquire as much as he likes – he will have to come to this conclusion. It is a natural process, and effort must bear fruit. If a labourer receives wages all right from his employer, will the Creator then keep back the reward from one who is seeking Him?

We can be encouraged that the Great Master describes our path of devotion as a natural process and that the Master will look after us. The Saints explain, for instance, that our life here is a mixture of good and bad, and that all our actions bring consequences. We shall all definitely leave here one day, by the process of death. Since people have such different destinies in this life, it is more credible to suppose that this variation is the result of the sum of all past actions than to ascribe it to divine whim.

We go where our heart is – or, as Hazur Maharaj Ji used to say, we go where our attachments are. For most beings, this means that the end of one life is followed by a return into a physical body soon after, as the attachments to Earth are still strong and a mountain of accumulated karma remains to bind us to this creation.

We are by no means totally happy here. As Hazur Maharaj Ji explained, this is the nature of life here on this plane of creation, since we “take birth along with our karmas,” and the appropriate karmic balance to earn life here is a mixture of good and bad. (If we had all bad karmas, he used to say, we would be in a hell, and if we had all good we would be in a heaven.)

The saints offer us a way out of this endless cycle of births and deaths. They offer us some rational insights: we are what we eat; as we think so we are; as we sow so shall we reap. If we live an unethical life, this damages others and ourselves, and attaches us yet more to the world’s processes. Saints advise that we live as total vegetarians, avoid alcohol and mind affecting drugs, and live as moral a life as we can. Common sense tells us that this is the path of right living.

We need to realize, though, that these bases of good living are but the foundation of spirituality; the next step is to become active spiritually. Just as we take worldly instruction from someone more knowledgeable on a subject, so equally in spirituality it makes sense to follow someone who knows the spiritual path.

This world is not our home, and indeed cannot be since we have to leave it (by death), so it makes sense to want to find our real home. The Masters say that we are descended from the true Lord himself, and so our real home is with him. Anyone away from home desires sooner or later to return, and the saints say that our underlying dissatisfaction in this world is because deep within we want to go to our real home.

It is also true that a teacher can take us only as far as he has himself progressed. So if we want to be shown the way back to our true home, we need to be guided by someone who knows the whole journey, and who therefore belongs to that level himself. If we search around in this world we fail to find anyone who fits the bill, unless we find a living Master. He will not say explicitly who and what he is, but it will be implicit in the steadiness of his life and behaviour and the total consistency of all his teachings.

At this point the seeker has to take a leap of faith. Although there is no outer proof of the Master’s inner teachings, there is a credibility in the sheer good sense of everything he tells us. He does not require us to suspend rational judgment and rely on credulity or gullibility, but rather to satisfy ourselves by observing him and absorbing all he has to offer us. Then once we are satisfied that the balance of probabilities is in his favour, he says, we should take what he tells us on an initial or provisional trust (i.e., faith) and be willing to apply ourselves to the practical course of meditation. If we accept this, he invites us to apply for initiation and then put into practice all he teaches us and so find out the truth for ourselves.

The present Master has said that there is nothing so convincing as our own experience. Sardar Bahadur Jagat Singh described this human body as the laboratory in which we should carry out the

Master’s experiments. Hazur Maharaj Ji often urged us to keep up our meditation practice despite the ups and downs that occur during our lives and not to try to force the pace or expect rapid, definable results.

We do not do meditation for the results but because he has told us we must do it, and it is a chance to have some peace from the restless activity of our mind and be in his (inner) company.

All saints agree on the vital importance of meditation and following as closely as we can the guidance of our Master. He has no doubt about what he tells us, as he speaks from his own devotional practice and experience. The present Master also says we should have confidence in ourselves, and realize that because the Lord has marked us for initiation, it means he has confidence in us that we can follow successfully the path of devotion and meditation. There is thus no question of any justification for a lack of faith. This is summed up in Soami Ji Maharaj’s _Sar Bachan (Prose)_, aphorism 116, which is the only such paragraph to be printed entirely in capitals:

> LEAVING EVERYTHING ELSE ASIDE, ONE MUST IMPLICITLY OBEY THESAT GURU OF HIS OWN TIME, AND FAITHFULLY FOLLOW HIS INSTRUCTIONS.… THIS IS THE LONG AND SHORT OF EVERYTHING.

> When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes, I all alone beweep my outcast state,
> And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featured like him, like him with friends possest, Desiring this man’s art, and that man’s scope, With what I most enjoy contented least;
> Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, Haply I think on thee, – and then my state, Like to the lark at break of day arising
> From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate; For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth brings, That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
> <sub>William Shakespeare</sub>

## Something to Think About
**This, Too, Will Pass**

A powerful king, ruler of many domains, was in a position of such magnificence that wise men were his mere employees. And yet one day he felt himself confused and called the sages to him. He said: “I do not know the cause, but something impels me to seek a certain ring, one that will enable me to stabilize my state. I must have such a ring. And this ring must be one which, when I am unhappy, will make me joyful. At the same time, if I am happy and look upon it, I must be made sad.”

The wise men consulted one another and threw themselves into deep contemplation, and finally they came to a decision as to the character of this ring which would suit their king.

The ring which they devised was one upon which was inscribed the legend:

> THIS, TOO, WILL PASS
> <sub>Idries Shah, _The Way of the Sufi_</sub>

> Time changes and will go on changing, but Nam does not change. The current of Nam goes on as usual. It is Nam which changes the times and brings about all changes.
> Till we are able to put our consciousness in Nam, we will be subject to changes, now happy and now miserable. That is why the Saints repeatedly exhort us to withdraw our conscious attention from the nine doors of the body and fix it in Shabd.
> <sub>Maharaj Jagat Singh, _The Science of the Soul_</sub>

## Book Review

**New Seeds of Contemplation**

By Thomas Merton

Publisher: New York: New Directions Publishing, 2007 ISBN: 978-0811-20099-8

> New Seeds of Contemplation,Thomas Merton’s collection of essays on the pursuit of the interior life, is worth reading over and over again. In these essays one encounters a traveller on the spiritual path with rare powers of observation, honesty and trust in God. He writes with breathtaking candour about the deceitfulness and trickeries of the mind. He has an unsentimental understanding of the rigours of spiritual practice. And he has an inspiring capacity to accept from God a wide range of gifts, including absolute poverty, silence and apparent lack of progress.

Thomas Merton was a Roman Catholic Trappist monk. He spent most of his life in a monastery in Kentucky. A poet and author of more than seventy books, he wrote on diverse topics ranging from contemplative prayer and monastic life to peace, nonviolence and racial tolerance. Some of his books, like _The Sign of Jonah_, lyrically describe the experience of God in nature. Others, like _Zen and the Birds of Appetite or The Asian Journals of Thomas Merton,_ offer his insights on Zen, enlightenment and the human condition. Merton recognized throughout his life that there were many paths to God, and that God calls us in many ways to return. The essays about meditation and contemplation in _New Seeds of Contemplation_ are neither linear nor systematic. Rather, they are a mix of notes from his own efforts in contemplation: confessions, observations, warnings and words of encouragement. Merton had a firm grasp on the nature of the mind and ego, and well understood that he was just a struggling soul like everyone else. His essays often read like letters from a close friend on the spiritual path.

He has no hesitation in speaking of our profound shortcomings as we attempt God realization, especially when we experience times of discouragement.
> Despair is the absolute extreme of self-love. It is reached when a man deliberately turns his back on all help from anyone else in order to taste the rotten luxury of knowing himself to be lost.… Because our own resources inevitably fail us, we are all more or less subject to discouragement and to despair. Despair is the development of a pride so great and stiff-necked that it selects the absolute misery of damnation rather than accept happiness from the hands of God.

On the other hand, he writes, “Humility contains in itself the answer to all the great problems of the soul.… Humility alone can destroy the self-centredness that makes joy impossible.” He asks, “How can you be humble, if you are always paying attention to yourself?”

Merton describes many of the unsavoury aspects of our minds with unsettling accuracy.
> People who know nothing of God, and whose lives are centred on themselves, imagine that they can only find themselves by asserting their own desires and ambitions and appetites in a struggle with the rest of the world … thus emphasizing the difference between themselves and other men, who have less than they do.… [But] the man who lives in division is living in death.

Merton’s extensive meditation practice allows him to describe the actual experience of prayer in stark and revealing language.

> Prayer and love are really learned in the hour when prayer becomes impossible and your heart turns to stone.… It is useless to get upset when you cannot shake off distractions. In the first place you must realize that they are almost unavoidable in the life of prayer. The necessity of kneeling and suffering submersion under a tidal wave of wild and inane images is one of the standard trials of the contemplative life.… You would profit much … by patiently resisting distractions, and learning something of your own helplessness and incapacity.

Merton writes that “it is the will to pray that is the essence of prayer, and desire to find God, to see Him and to love Him, is the only thing that matters”.

> No matter how distracted you may be, pray by peaceful, even perhaps inarticulate efforts to centre your heart upon God, who is present to you in spite of all that is going on in your mind. His presence does not depend on your thoughts of Him. He is unfailingly there; if He were not, you could not even exist. The memory of His unfailing presence is the surest anchor for our minds and hearts in the storms of distraction and temptation by which we are purified.

Merton beautifully describes the blessings of being in the company of a saint, one who models what it means to be humble and to have fully submitted to the will of God.

> His gentleness and sweetness are not pressed through his pores by the crushing restraint of a spiritual strait jacket. They come from his direct docility to the light of truth and to the will of God. Hence a saint is capable of talking about the world, without any explicit reference to God, in such a way that his statements give greater glory to God and arouse a greater love of God, than the observations of someone less holy.

Therefore, whatever a saint says or does becomes a spiritual lesson, a sermon, in itself.

> For the saint preaches sermons by the way he walks and the way he stands and the way he sits down and the way he picks things up and holds them in his hand. The perfect do not have to reflect on the details of their actions.… They finally cease to be aware of themselves doing things, and gradually God begins to do all that they do, in them and for them.

For all of our limitations and delusions, Merton knows there is only one solution, and that is the power of God. Our role is to trust and have faith in the One who brought us into being and who has promised to take us home.

> Unless God utters Himself in you, speaks His own name in the centre of your soul, you will no more know him than a stone knows the ground.… He comes down from heaven and finds us. He looks at us from the depths of his own infinite actuality, which is everywhere, and His seeing us gives us a new mind in which we also discover Him. We only know Him in so far as we are known by Him.

Ultimately, Merton concludes:
> What you most need … is an unfaltering trust in the Divine guidance, as well as the courage to risk everything for Him. In many ways, the journey seems to be a foolish gamble. And you may well make many mistakes.… What matters is for you to be heroically faithful to grace and love. If God calls you to Him, then he implicitly promises you all the graces that you need to reach Him. You must be blindly faithful to that promise.
_New Seeds of Contemplation_ will give great encouragement to anyone striving, as Merton did, to “love God with all your heart, and all your mind, and all your soul”.

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## I Have Come

> I have come to drag you out of yourself and take you in my heart.
> I have come to bring out the beauty you never knew you had and lift you like a prayer to the sky. If no one can recognize you, I do because you are my life and soul.
> Don’t run away, accept your wounds and let bravery be your shield.
> It takes a thousand stages for the perfect being to evolve.
> Every step of the way I will walk with you and never leave you stranded.
> Be patient, do not open the lid too soon.
> Simmer away until you are ready. In this game I make the rules.
> I roll you like a ball and chase you when I choose.
> <sub>_Rumi, Hidden Music__1_</sub>
> <sub>Translated by Mafi and Kolin</sub>

1 Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers Ltd, © Azima Melita Kolin and Maryam Mafi, 2001.

<sub>August 2011 3</sub>

## A Master’s Love for a Master

Each one of us has it within to reach the same level of spiritual attainment as the Master. This is the reason that he initiates disciples: to realize within ourselves the divine perfection that is God.

No one comes to God without going through the Master. We come in human form and we are taught by the Master or Guru in human form. That is the will of God. Every single Master that has come on to the earth in human form has had to find a Master in human form in order to travel the inner journey back to God.

The love that the Masters have for their own Masters is indescribable. Still, we have books full of love songs, poems and stories written to express the depth of their adoration, gratitude and respect.

The woman saint Mira was born in 1498, the grand-daughter of the ruling prince of Merta in Rajasthan. Her Master was the low caste cobbler Guru Ravidas and she followed his path of divine love with unflinching dedication, in spite of public censure, persecution by her family and even attempts on her life.

Mira repeatedly pointed out the necessity of a Guru in order to realize the Lord. The Guru, she said, is the doorman to the gates of salvation: he alone holds the key to open the door. With the key of divine love he opens the lock and flings wide the portal of liberation for the soul to enter. “Without meeting the Lord I cannot live,” she says. “But without the Master He cannot be realized.”

In her prayer to her Master she says:

> Pray come, O Master, illumined and wise; A glimpse of your face has enchanted me.
> When you come my way, inquire for the one Who, pining for you, is frenzied with pain. Day and night I have no peace or respite, And I writhe like a fish out of water.
> Save for your darshan nothing can soothe me; In constant anguish I am nearing my end.
> <sub>_Mira, The Divine Lover_</sub>

The lovers of the Lord tell us that there is no human love that can compare with the experience of divine love. We have only the merest glimpse when we compare our love for each other and the divine love that the Masters write about. Ours is worldly love. But the love of the Masters is constant and never failing.

Mira describes the pain of separation from her Master as the writhing of a fish out of water – nothing can soothe this terrible agony except the darshan of her Master. One might think that Mira is being dramatic, but it seems the greater the love, the more the pain of being denied the darshan of the beloved.

In his poem “The Malady”, Saint Paltu speaks through the voice of a girl who has fallen in love and is disclosing her secret to her mother. Knowing that many will be able to identify with this powerful emotion, he draws the listener to his own condition as he talks about his own malady:

> I have lost my heart, O Mother, I feel so helpless! I feel so restless without a glimpse of my beloved.
> My life I shall lay as offering at the feet of my Lord. This malady of mine will cost me my life, for sure.
> There is but one remedy: if I could but meet my beloved.
> I have been smitten with poignant love,
> And the dart of His Name has pierced my heart. Unconscious, I fell down, oblivious of public slander. Who can treat me, O Paltu, except Master, the Physician?
> I have lost my heart. O Mother, I am so helpless!
> <sub><sub>_Saint Paltu_</sub></sub>

The poignant love that Saint Paltu describes is very moving: having met his Master he is now sick with love for the Lord. Often in human love we are caught in the paradox that the one we love is also the one who makes us suffer, and the one who makes us sick with love is also the one who has the power to cure us. Paltu calls the Master his Physician, the only one who can cure his malady. He refers to the “dart of His Name” and uses the ancient analogy of the dart or arrow of love to describe the sweet pain that he experiences.

Every story told about how a Master met his Master is a love story. In _Heaven on Earth_ Daryai Lal Kapur describes the three year search by Baba Jaimal Singh to find a Master who could teach him about the five shabds. Alone and barely 15 years old when he left home, Baba Ji had travelled on foot to every place where there was talk of a Guru.

The author describes the meeting with Soami Ji:

> Baba Ji sat on the banks of the Jamuna River, deeply distressed and not knowing what to do next. He had spent almost three years in his search; he had covered thousands of miles, visited hundreds of places and met countless sadhus, yogis and holy men.… Now on the brink of discovery, his search seemed destined to fail. His heart was torn with desire to meet the Master he could not find. With tears rolling down his cheeks, in his helplessness, he prayed to the Lord.
> Suddenly Baba Ji became aware of two bathers engrossed in a discussion about a holy man and the wonderful discourses he gave. Baba Ji moved closer to them and listened for a while. He asked them the name of the saint they were speaking about and where he lived. They told him that the great saint, Soami Shiv Dayal Singh, known as Soami Ji, lived in Panni Gali….
> He quickly went to the house and found Soami Ji Maharaj sitting in the courtyard among his disciples, about to start satsang. The moment Baba Ji saw him, a sense of peace filled his heart and he approached and bowed respectfully at Soami Ji’s feet. Soami Ji smiled and remarked:__“He has arrived – my old friend!”

Baba Ji became Soami Ji’s most devoted disciple, deeply immersed in meditation and unquestioningly following his Master’s instructions. And in _Sar Bachan Poetry_ we read Soami Ji’s love poem to his own Master:

> I am in love with the form of my Master, My heart is enraptured by his sweet words. Ever since I embraced his feet and bathed In the dust of those feet
> The darkness of my heart has been entirely driven out. His charming face, his elegant form
> And his radiance
> Have slain the devil in my heart.
> The company of my Master and his words of wisdom Have proved this world and the next to be false.
> The body’s inner mysteries
> Have been revealed to me by my gracious Master Who has travelled the path himself.

The love that the Masters have for their Masters has been told in the stories of their lives and in the letters that passed between them, as well as by the Masters themselves in intimate conversation with close disciples. Books such as _Heaven on Earth, Treasure Beyond Measure_ and _With the Three Masters_ are filled with accounts of the devotion of the Masters for their Masters.

Making contact with the Master is a necessary precedent to the working of his grace. The key to the inner door is held by the perfect Master who has himself travelled through the inner regions and become one with the absolute. The key is the method of meditation that enables the seeker to go within – that is, withdraw his consciousness to the eye centre and enter the inner regions of divine bliss.

It is the Master who brings us to the path and guides our every step along the way. It is he who connects us with the divine melody within. It is he who gives us initiation and teaches us the method for meditation so that we can return home to the Lord. It is he who softens our hard and ego driven hearts and teaches us to love him.

He is there at the beginning and the end of journey. He is the faithful friend who never leaves us, who never rejects us and who never abandons us. He is the one who is worthy of our love and devotion!

> When the inner eye is opened one realizes that the Master is the one before whom all should prostrate themselves. He is the life of the universe. He is Truth personified or Reality in human form. He is of the Truth and reflects the Truth. He is the top of creation. There is no one better than him. There is no one greater than him here or hereafter. Both the worlds should bow at his feet.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. V_</sub>

## The Prince and the Gypsies

There’s a well-known story that Maharaj Jagat Singh used to tell in his satsangs about the infant son of a king who is snatched from the palace by a band of roving gypsies.

The king never stops looking for his son and after many years learns where his son is living. In order to reclaim him the king disguises himself as a gypsy and enters the gypsy camp.

The prince, now a young man, has forgotten his father and his royal heritage and believes himself to be one of the gypsies. He could not imagine any other identity or way of life. So the king, understanding this, becomes a gypsy. He lives in the gypsy camp and befriends his son. As they sit round the campfire in the evenings, he begins to tell him stories of his true home and of the happiness that abounds there. Little by little the son tentatively begins to believe, and the dormant memories of his origin start to awaken within him. He begins to want to return home with his father.

But his father tells him, “The bonds and habits of this place bind you here, and I wish to take you with me as speedily as you can manage. So, in order to journey with me to this other country, there are certain things I want you to do.”

And so begins the wonderful tale of how the king remains with his son through all the ups and downs and vicissitudes of life at this level, until at last the bonds of gypsy life are broken and he returns home with his father.

Have we become too complex in this absorbing modern world to understand the significance of the king who comes himself? Do we understand enough of this story to enhance our appreciation of the Master? He is not what we see. He is not who we think he is. He is in fact an enigma for us until, after having made some headway on the journey, we see him not just as his body form but as something entirely other.

We are soul – drops of the divine ocean who find ourselves encased in bodies. Not knowing the truth of our divine origin, we believe ourselves to be the body and therefore base all our hopes and desires, our joys and aspirations, on where this body dwells – the world. But this world is not the home of the soul. It is a place where the body lives and experiences life through the mind and the senses.

Like the camp of the gypsies, this is the only home we know. What a task to convince us otherwise! How can the soul ever know otherwise unless somebody comes from its true origin to awaken it to the truth?

So, the father comes, looking like a gypsy and dressing and speaking like a gypsy. For how else would he be able to communicate with us? And then something about him and his explanations ring true for us and we begin to believe him. Our souls begin to awaken from the deep sleep in which we have been lost for so long.

Baba Ji has said that the soul is asleep in the creation. The mind, senses and passions encase it in a trance like state. This world is really just a tourist destination, a place we came to visit, and the only way out is through the grace of God, when he sends the Master with an invitation to come home.

Where and what is the way home? Firstly, the soul must be in a human body and, secondly, it must be contacted by a perfect Master who can put the soul in touch with the Shabd. The saints tell us no one can meet the Lord except through this current of Shabd, and it is only the Satguru who can connect the soul with it. This way of emancipation is the rule laid down by God himself.

What does the perfect Master do for his disciples? Remember, it’s all about getting souls, burdened with mind and karma, to become light enough to complete the journey: our journey within ourselves to know ourselves as soul.

When we move house, look at how much we have accumulated that we have to clear out. In the same way, this journey requires that we travel light. No excess luggage. Those old human conditions: pride, anger, greed, attachment and lust – where is the room for them on the journey?

The pull of the gypsy camp is very strong and so the Master gives very specific instructions on how to live out our days in this world. These instructions are specific and define our whole lifestyle. And the focal point of our lives has to become a daily practice of meditation, aimed at lifting the attention to the eye centre.

The Master knows very well how difficult it will be for us to find our way to the eye centre. Remember, we have been in the gypsy camp all our lives. This will be no light proposition. Time and again we will fall into the old ways of thinking and behaving, and that is where satsang, reading our Sant Mat books and doing simran will all come to our aid.

With attention fully focused, we are to make our way to the door in order to walk through it and into the many and various spiritual planes that lie above our body consciousness. In his radiant form the Master waits for us at this door to guide us further on the journey.

Once having met him there, we truly start on the journey within leading us to the Shabd.

The King has invited us to return to his court and we cannot resist his invitation.

The Master has put us on the path and told us how to prepare for the journey. Sooner or later we will leave this gypsy camp, having broken our bonds here, and enter the vehicle of Shabd that will take us home. He will make this possible for us through his abundant and never ending grace. All we have to do is continue making our feeble efforts to get up and leave.

No one is saying that the journey will be easy. We know very well how weak and feeble we are. And the Master also knows this. That’s why he tells us how dependent we are on his grace. In _Die to Live_ Maharaj Charan Singh tells a questioner:

> Leaving all these things to one’s own effort, one could never go back to the Father. The question of going back would not even arise. One would never even think about the Father. So it is not the meditation which is taking us back to the Father. It is the Father himself, through the Master, who is taking us back to the Father.

The Master is not telling us that our efforts are meaningless. What he is bringing home to us is that we should always be aware that our efforts are due to his grace.

We cannot understand how we have somehow landed in the company of a Shabd Master. What we do know – from his letters and satsangs and through personal contact with him – is that he is thoroughly and lovingly attending to the task of taking his marked souls home.

> The greatest miracle of the mystics is that they change the very attitude of our life, the way of our life. They turn everything upside down in our life. That is the greatest miracle the saints come to perform in our lives.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, as quoted in _Legacy of Love_</sub>

## Meditation Is Non-Negotiable

Meditation practice has to be done. For us as disciples, that’s non-negotiable. Why is this? Well, the spiritual life without meditation is like spending weeks collecting good soil, cleaning it, sifting it, fertilising it, watering it and then not planting the tree. The tree, if planted in such soil and if looked after, will grow strong and give much delicious fruit, but if the tree is not planted, no matter how good the soil, how can it grow?

To meditate is to live the teachings; to meditate is to move closer and closer to the Master; to meditate is to plant the tree in the ground. The four principles are like cables that lead to the “power station”, but it is only the practice of meditation which actually switches the power on. There is not a Sant Mat book, not a satsang, not a spiritual question answered by the Master, where this point is not made clear, one way or another.

So why does the Master constantly tell us that meditation practice is non-negotiable? Let us take a different approach for a moment. Everyone has a date with death. This statement may seem a little harsh, but seventy or eighty years from now, how many of us will still be in the physical body? So where will we be and what will have happened to us? What about our families, our beloved pets, our houses, our possessions – everything that is so important to us now?

Perhaps even something else that we don’t like to hear will have happened. The Master who guides us today will not be in the physical body. That exquisite form will be gone. Maybe there will be another exquisite form, or maybe there will not. And even more scary is the possibility that all the words that we hear from the Master himself, over and over, begging us to wake up and prioritise our lives, are forgotten within a few minutes of us hearing or reading them as we step right back into the world, living our lives as if death will not visit us.

In the true tradition of the great mystics, the fifteenth century saint Kabir was not concerned with life after death, but with the conquest of immortality within this fragile body. He tells us that, while still in this body – this “bag of skin” – we can fathom the mystery of life and death, and the secret that lies hidden within man at that unknown depth where death finds no place.

Death is a topic that is generally not discussed openly and candidly. After all, we think, it is something that happens to others. And if it is something that we do have to face, then it must be far off in the future – certainly something that we do not need to consider now.

Yet Great Master tells us that death is a time of much anxiety if we have not done our meditation practice. He says that at death the suffering is acute and only if one has learnt to die daily can one withstand this pain.

So when our date with death arrives, it is going to be very tough and difficult to deal with unless we have experienced dying whilst still living – through meditation practice. Perhaps we fail to grasp and to understand just how very serious Baba Ji is when he tells us that it is a matter of the utmost urgency that we make sincere and persistent effort to do our meditation practice.

Whatever is worth doing is worth doing now – not tomorrow, not the day after, but now, from this moment onwards. If we do not do it today, what guarantee is there that we will be able to do it tomorrow? If there is one thing that we should be aware of it is that we should indelibly engrave on our consciousness that our meditation practice is totally and absolutely non-negotiable in our lives, irrespective of our circumstances.

Each and every one of us has our own individual destiny to go through in this life. It is the nature of this world that there must be ups and downs in all our lives. If we are to face these with equanimity and dignity, keep our balance and fulfil our worldly responsibilities to the best of our ability, then, as Baba Ji has so emphatically told us, it is our meditation practice – the doing, the effort, not the talking – that counts. Without our meditation practice becoming the central core of our lives, we cannot hope to make the inner journey.

Most of us who have been initiated into Sant Mat believe intellectually and even instinctively that what the Masters teach us is true. Why is it then that we have great difficulty converting this understanding into a reality and making the teachings and particularly the meditation practice part of the core fabric of our daily lives? Is it that we don’t take the teachings seriously – allocating them to just a segment of our lives – or is it that we find it difficult, maybe impossible, to register the reality that we actually have precious little time left in this human body that we now occupy?

Living the teachings is not the same as belonging to a club or going to a church, temple, synagogue or gurdwara for a few hours and then forgetting about what we have heard. For us, following the teachings of Sant Mat is a 24-hour-a-day path – every day until we die!

Baba Ji has often said that even if we keep our promise to do two and a half hours of meditation every single day of our life, but we are in the world for the remaining 21 and a half hours, we can hardly expect to tilt our life towards the spiritual. If we casually meander along God’s private pathway, we will neither enjoy the company of the world nor share the company of the Lord. A real disciple is always, at every moment, either doing simran – the repetition of the words, or dhyan – beholding the inner form of the Master, or listening to the inner sound, our bhajan.

Baba Ji has also often told us that our way of life and particularly our meditation practice must become a normal and natural part of our lives, just as breathing, eating, sleeping and other activities have become integral parts of our lives.

Easier said than done! But how do we make these simple, clear teachings part of our everyday lives while living in the world and fulfilling our responsibilities?

Maharaj Charan Singh puts this into perspective by telling us to make our meditation a habit. He says:

> Habits are easily formed and soon become part of our daily routine, and then if we neglect them, we start missing those things. Similarly, by giving the same time every day, this meditation will become part of our daily routine.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Thus Saith the Master_</sub>

We have to take our meditation practice seriously and understand once and for all that it is non-negotiable, for we cannot have both the world and God. As Kabir put it, two swords cannot fit into one scabbard.

The world is not in love with satsangis. Almost everything in the world is designed to pull us right out, to pull us away from the teachings, to pull us off the path. This world is doing its job extremely well. It does not want us to leave this creation. So unless we start to take our meditation practice seriously, we will come back to this creation.

Again, Hazur Maharaj Ji has told us that meditation is the first thing and that everything else is secondary to that, for without meditation practice we will always remain scattered in the world and the mind will always remain busy with worldly matters.

If we do not develop clarity of thinking through our meditation practice; if we do not acknowledge what is truly valuable to us in this life; and if we do not actively rearrange our priorities to reflect this, then we cannot complain when we are knocked off-balance when faced with problems or crises. The events of our lives may force us to make difficult decisions in difficult circumstances, in a difficult, dangerous and uncertain world, and we need to do this with the tranquillity, calmness, stability and clarity of vision and understanding that dedicated meditation practice brings.

Our physical bodies are so weak and fragile that it is vital to look beyond the body to find the real purpose of life. Everyone knows that nothing from this world has ever accompanied a person beyond death. Would it not be terribly sad if, when death comes, we see that we have been deluded, and that what we thought was real was in fact just a shadow of reality? How utterly awful it will be if, having been initiated into the mystic path, we then sacrifice our spiritual practice to gain perishable rewards during the journey of our lives, and we die with great regret and remorse instead of ecstatic joy and happiness.

With great courage and determination we must keep the promise made at the time of our initiation to regard our meditation practice as non-negotiable. We have a rare and unique opportunity here. Human birth and contact with a perfect living saint are not exactly an everyday occurrence. Are we using this opportunity? We ask the Master for the wealth of Nam, to initiate us onto the mystic path. He gives it to us for the asking. It is priceless, and yet we so often do not appreciate its value. We don’t treasure it. Instead, we barter it for all the shiny short-lived trinkets of this world.

But by ensuring that our meditation practice is absolutely non-negotiable, we will live such a life that, while others weep and wail, we will depart this physical world laughing and full of joy.

> One does not become a satsangi simply by being initiated. One must mould his life in accordance with the principles of satsang. Every thought, speech and action must conform to them. Actions speak louder than words. Thoughts are even more potent. A satsangi’s daily conduct must bear the hallmark of excellence and must reveal that he is the follower of a true Master.
> <sub>Maharaj Jagat Singh, _The Science of the Soul_</sub>

> Maharaj Sawan Singh
> <sub>August 2011 19</sub>

## ‘You Must Name His Name!’

In Shakespeare’s _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ the rough-and-ready working men of Athens have been greatly honoured: they are to perform a play in celebration of a wedding, which is to be performed for the aristocracy of the city.

Their major concern, once they start their rehearsals, is that they, as working men, must not upset or offend the highly refined and aristocratic members of their audience. Their biggest problem is that there is a lion in their play which, they are afraid, is something “which the ladies will not abide”. They consider various ways of reassuring their audience: Should they have a prologue to explain that the lion in their play is not a real lion? Or should they have the actor’s face visible through his lion’s mask? But Bottom, the weaver, solves their problem brilliantly. “Nay,” he says, “you must name his name! … Tell them plainly that he is not a lion, but Snug, the joiner!”

As satsangis on the path of God-realization, we need to perform a similar “naming of his name”– but with the difference that doing it once only will not do. Our “naming of his name” must happen continuously and unceasingly. There must be uninterrupted clarity in our minds about the identity of the Lion in our lives, the Master.

The theme of clear identity is an important one in our lives as satsangis. When, with our simran, we continuously “name his name” during the course of the day, we are maintaining his identity and his presence in our lives. We should similarly be naming the name of whatever it is that we are busy with during the day. We must always know what we are doing, what we are on about. We must be absolutely clear about the good things and the bad things as they exist around us.

It is only when we name their name that we clearly recognize identities

-
and can respond suitably.

When, as they say, you are picking over the garbage dumps of the world, you must know what it is that you are doing. You must name its name. You must say to yourself, “These are garbage dumps which I am picking over!” When you are bending down in a garbage dump, you must not think that you are reaching out for the portals of Sach Khand. Your mind is a deliberate and stubborn entity, and there are millions and millions of lifetimes of garbage picking deeply ingrained into it. To change its orientation will require years and years of very accurately naming the name.

Bhajan requires even greater clarity from us. We must be perfectly clear about exactly what it is that we are trying to achieve. Bhajan is about “catching” the Shabd, and about holding on to whatever we catch for as long and as tightly as we can. It is listening to his Name. It is the goal and purpose of our being satsangis. It is a holy thing, a holy Name, and all our focus and all our attention must be aimed at “catching” it.

We as satsangis share an important characteristic with Bottom and his actor friends: we are as serious about our path as they are about their play. We both see ourselves as playing for very high stakes indeed. Our Master has initiated us, and in doing so he gave us an important role in his own play. What he wants from us, no doubt, is that we take our role seriously – as seriously as do Bottom and his friends – and that we practise hard, and focus as hard as they do on pleasing their exalted audience. In our case, we also have an exalted audience – of One!

> I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.
> <sub>Bible, Isaiah 43:1</sub>

## Knowledge and Knowing

The path becomes an experienced truth when you begin to walk it. Nothing short of that has any reality.

Priests and politicians recite principles and practices. The intellectual types build argumentative mazes. But the theory, the principles and the instructions are not the path. It’s not possible for the mind or the intellect to know God. Maharaj Sawan Singh tells us we can find true spiritual knowledge only by transcending our intellectual knowledge (_Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. I_).

Knowledge and knowing are quite different. An expanding intellectual grasp is a world away from the sureness of a deepening conscious experience. Ignorance of this makes the door to consciousness invisible. Obscuring concepts and intellectualizations hide it.

The door to consciousness is an impenetrable mythical barrier to people for whom knowledge is the highest reality. Yet it is there and swings open easily. This is achieved by spiritual practice, by taking the attention out of the mind.

Many dream of opening the inner door. It is the rare person who does it. The need for spiritual practice is missed because the difference between knowledge and knowing is elusively subtle before it becomes glaringly obvious. A comparison makes it simple to uncover the difference.

The fantastic projections of science fiction a few decades ago are now so ordinary and mundane. A momentary hiccup in an almost miraculously instant transglobal multiperson video-conference is cause for complaint. Full-colour pictures seen on satellite television of other galaxies hundreds of thousands of light years away are only mildly interesting.

All this technology is the result of understanding and mastering some aspect of physical law. This is perceived by our mind-centred culture as an expansion of man’s consciousness. But is it?

A long time ago, like many people, I grew up in the practical world of an old-style farm. In the naturally lit, dim interior our communication technology was a wooden-cased telephone sharing a common line with all the other farms. It was only used when necessary. With a turn of the crank handle generator all the phones on the line rang. Two long rings and a short one was the ring code of our two-digit phone number.

The other technological marvel, a shortwave valve radio in the living room, required such dedication to make head or tail of its static crackles that no one really bothered with it. The real world that required attention existed outside the mesh-screened back door.

Farming was practised – not discussed or theorized about. Plants grew and produced and died. Animals were born, grew, reproduced and died. People too. The cycle of life was the reality. Even to children.

The “facts of life” informative talks usually given to suburban adolescent kids were just the realities of life to us. It was the whole cycle of life. Conception, birth, life and especially the reality of death. It was not an intellectual knowledge but a knowing arrived at from experience.

Experience is the fruit of practice. Nowadays the farmhouse back door has been replaced with a vast, conceptual, non-reality instant experience in our digital screen world. And 5.6 million references to whatever can be found in 0.23 seconds, giving an experience of reality to anything your mind drifts into.

We can so structure our inquiry that nothing contrary to our preconceived perception appears. Join the worldwide congregation of whatever you wish to believe in. Nowadays our conditioning no longer needs experiential proof. Conceptual experience has taken its place.

This becomes the depth of experienced reality. People occupy a world of projected and grasped concepts. This is “knowledge”. It does not open doors.

The Master says a concept is just a concept until it is experienced. You “know” by experiencing. There is conceptual Sant Mat and there is practised Sant Mat. To how many satsangis is Sant Mat more than a concept? How much experience of Sant Mat do we have?

Many people experience the concept in an emotional way and translate that experience to themselves as experiential proof. This is the “proof” of many people following a ritualised, book-based, conceptual, speculative belief system.

Concepts are constructed out of calculated and projected thought. Neither is possible in the absolute here and now. The here and now is experienced when you bring your entire attention into the moment. It is in the here and now that the whole path will unfold for you. Sant Mat is entirely a here and now experience. Keep checking on the whereabouts of your attention. It is so easy to get lost in explanations.

All through the ages the Masters have had to explain something beyond the explainable. To do this they have used what the people they are speaking to can grasp. They have explained using analogies, anecdotes and metaphors. If you try to understand them with sympathy you will attain an understanding. If you take them as literal you will miss the point. And just see the pointing finger.

The pointing finger is so often later mistaken for the truth itself. It is revered, temples are built for it, books are written about it and wars fought over it. Man’s attention and his life are held captive by a thought form. The reality lies in the experience. The experience lies in the practice.

Vegetarianism as a concept would serve no practical purpose. As a practice it has positive results. So, too, sobriety and morality. Practised together they provide an environment that spirituality can take root in. Practiced spirituality is a method or exercise by which the consciousness is applied to getting into complete harmony with the life force.

In the vastness of possible experiences, sifting the real method from the mimicked real is an intellectual impossibility on your own. A living guide who has traversed the path from beginning to end is essential.

The default guide for the masses throughout history has been a traditional authority who points out an uncertain path informed by limited and conditioned thought. The books or scriptures by now-dead authors that guide these authorities are subjected to all sorts of intellectual interpretations, which are often based on the agendas of the interpreters. Consequently the unverifiable path of the masses is lit by second-hand, speculative and sometimes imagined knowledge. Their faith is maintained by blindly and unquestioningly holding to a speculative belief system.

As the Great Master advised us, “Transcend intellectual knowledge.” Knowledge based on concept and passed along a path of speculation and guided by conditioned thought instead of tangible experience tends to mutate. Knowing as opposed to knowledge is based on experience with repeatable consistency. It is reliable. It is the result of conscious experience.

The Masters know. They teach from experience. They point out where to go and what to do, based on their own experience. Their experience results from following the instruction of their own living Master. This is the same instruction as guided their Masters. They have verified it from experience. Our salvation lies in following the instruction of an experienced, perfect living Master. To waver is fatal.

The Master has warned us that we are on a knife-edge of becoming a religion if we don’t focus on making the path a reality.

Conceptualization, speculation, interpretation, too much book-based conviction, and a bit of ritual are the harbingers of religion.

Truth and purity blossom into the most beautiful inner flower, but their beginning is rather dull compared to more exciting and colourful but unverified suppositions. But spiritual practice as revealed by a living Master is going to give you that wonderful inner experience.

Practice starts with becoming a decent human being – a sober and moral vegetarian at least. Then, initiation by a perfect living Master. Then, simran.

The value of simran cannot be overstated. It is the foundation of the whole system. Simran, standing humbly and inconspicuously covered in its seemingly boring and plain exterior, has the sweetest character

-and the most awesome power. Simran awakens one to super-consciousness. Simran bestows concentration. It is concentration that takes us inward to the astral, the causal and beyond. Simran gathers the energy resulting in concentration. Concentration leads to the Radiant Form of the Master. Contemplation on the Radiant Form enables the attention to stay there. And the divine melody is heard.

The life force becomes an experienced reality.

This inner journey is not speculation or concept or a patch of sand to bury your head in. It is to be experienced consciously. If you are experiencing difficulties, load the genuine Sant Mat program. Do it consciously, before you find the sign on your screen that says “fatal error encountered, the system will now shut down and reboot”.

All that matters in the end is your meditation. You don’t need a concept to follow. You don’t need anything in the mind. Sant Mat is real. Meditation is the way.

The mind is for interacting with this outside world. It is your tool.

Use it. But when its job is done, put it back on the shelf and return to remembrance. The results are obtained quickly, the Great Master assures us, if the instructions are followed with love and faith.

## The Creative Word

The creative Word is light and sound, which can be experienced within ourselves, not with material eyes and ears, of course, but with their spiritual counterparts. The divine light of the Word can be seen within ourselves, and the vibrations of the Word can be heard as the sweetest and most compelling music.

This is our salvation. Meditation … is only a preparation. To withdraw all consciousness from the body, and to focus the attention in the forehead is only coming to the railway station. We have yet to board the transport that will take us to our destination. That transport is the creative Music, and we board it simply by listening to its enchanting melody.

Some of the world’s greatest composers and musicians may have heard this Music within themselves. But try as they might, they could never capture, in the music of this world, its heart-rending beauty, its wonderful innate harmonies, and its consciousness-bestowing qualities.

This cosmic Music is the Axis of Being, the Axis of Love, the creative centre of the universe. It never stops. If it did, the universe would cease to be. It is the natural link between the One Being and the little beings who feel themselves to be separated. It is a blissful ladder to the One, a column of glory leading to the Eternal, an ascending stairway to the Infinite.

There is no higher kind of meditation than listening to this celestial symphony. It leads beyond all bodies, minds, birth, death, and everything else in created form.
> <sub>John Davidson, _One Being One_</sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>28 Spiritual Link</sub>

## An Irresistible Force

Maharaj Charan Singh once revealed that if disciples feel true longing for their Master, this is something that he cannot resist. He proved this while on tour in the hills of northern India.

During one of his satsang programmes in Mandi in Himachal Pradesh, there was an interval of two days between the official engagements that enabled Maharaj Ji to make an overnight trip to Manali, a hill station renowned for its beauty. On leaving the Mandi circuit house in the early morning, Maharaj Ji instructed the driver to turn left – the opposite direction to Manali. His host pointed out the mistake but Maharaj

Ji insisted. Again the host, thinking that Maharaj Ji was under some misapprehension about the roads and the route, said that turning left would take them towards Pathankot and not Manali. Maharaj Ji insisted.

Not far down the road, they came to the Mandi satsang ghar, where Maharaj Ji immediately got down from the car, climbed a few steps leading into the building, and entered a small room where two sevadars were seated on the floor with their heads bowed, eyes closed. Both men were physically disabled. Both had missed satsang the previous day due to the seva they had been given. Now with all the excitement of the first satsang over, they were experiencing a sense of loss that they, too, had not heard Maharaj Ji’s words and had not enjoyed the sweetness of his darshan along with their colleagues. Maharaj Ji stood quietly before them until they opened their eyes.

One can well imagine what their state must have been when they realized who was there. After a few moments he said to his host: “All right, let’s go!” And they retraced the road until they reached the turning to Manali.
> <sub><sub>_Legacy of Love_</sub></sub>

## The Pain of Separation

> One who has suffered the misery Of separation from Thee, O Lord,
> Alone will know the ache of my heart. The uninjured can never know the pain The wounded have to endure.
> To him who has no eyes, Morning is the same as evening; A barren woman cannot know The throes of childbirth.
> Only the one parted from Thee, O Lord, Will know the pain in my heart.

> I feel the agony, Although the wound Somewhere deep within I cannot see.
> Beloved Lord, pray come, Be my healer, make me whole.
> Only the one parted from Thee, O Lord, Will know the pain of my heart.
> With whom shall I speak of my anguish? Who can share it with me, O Kabir?
> I hold the tears within my heart, In silence I bear my agony,
> For the one parted from Thee Alone knows the pain of my heart.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

## Embrace the Pain

People have long debated the subject of happiness. Is it possible to achieve real happiness in this life or not? Many people strongly believe that it is indeed possible to achieve happiness in this world.

This presupposes that there is such a thing. We don’t have to go far to see evidence of unhappiness in this world. The hospitals are full of people who are sick and suffering, the prisons are full of people who have fallen foul of the law, many are stricken by poverty, and so on.

But is it actually possible to be happy? When we find ourselves less than satisfied with our lot in life what can we actually do? Generally we all do the same things. We pursue the gathering of wealth and possessions or we look for meaningful relationships and position and power. In short, we turn to the world.

But even when we are successful, sooner or later we return to feeling insecure, uneasy or unhappy with ourselves. Even when we have everything, we still feel something is lacking. Why do you suppose this is so?

The reason is that before we first incarnated here, throughout our descent from our original home, we retained a sense of connectedness with the Divine, but when we incarnated here on the material plane, the assault of the senses and the sensory experience so overwhelmed our consciousness that we turned our backs on the Lord and lost our sense of being connected to him.

Ever since then, no matter what we did, we felt lost and alone – we felt miserable. And in our ignorance we have turned to the world for consolation. But in so doing, we have bound ourselves to the faces, places and things of the world. We did not understand the principles of karma and attachment; we were driven by the dual motives of seeking pleasure and avoiding pain. What we did not realize was the enormous price that we would have to pay for all these indulgences.

But now the Lord has seen fit to bestow his richest blessings on us. First among these is the gift of human birth. We cannot overstate what a privilege this is because, out of all the many forms into which a soul may incarnate, it is only in the human form that it may aspire to liberation. Only as a human being can the soul engage in spiritual practice and, in so doing, work its way out of the maze of mind and maya and return to the home it left so long ago.

Then we were fortunate to come into contact with a true living Master and to be receptive to his teachings. How many people live virtually on the Master’s doorstep, and to them he is just another Sikh
-
admittedly with a large following.

Third, but by far the most important, is the inestimable blessing of the initiation that the Master has bestowed on us. This single fact has to all intents and purposes guaranteed us passage home to our beloved Father. All that we don’t know is how long it is going to take.

But has anything really changed in our lives? If we wish to go home we need to rise above the duality of pleasure and pain. We need to stop being a victim of the world’s agendas, reacting to every event that comes along and threatens to knock us off our perch. If we continue in this vein we will continue to be bound to the cycle of birth and death. If we want to go home, we need to stay focused on our goal.

Now here’s a statement that could seem somewhat surprising: The pain that you feel inside you, until and unless you have passed beyond the portal of the third eye, is the most real thing in your whole life.

This pain is not something that you should be running away from; you should be embracing it! Why? Because this pain is the pain of the soul separated from its source – the pain of the soul longing to go home to where it truly belongs. This is the pain born of true love. This is our inner truth and our reality.

But what have we been doing instead? We have been running away from this pain with all the speed our legs can manage. We have been fleeing the pain of separation within us and have been running straight into the arms of Kal, the power that governs this world. We need to turn and face this pain. This pain will take us straight to the feet of the Master within, and it is only when we merge into the Master’s Radiant Form that this pain goes away and we re-establish our connection with the Divine, and in fact begin our journey back to our true home.

So when you find yourself alone in the dark of the night, don’t fight back the tears. Just turn to him and let go. Understand that he is the key to your happiness; it is his grace alone that will get you home. So let the tears flow, for it is through the flood of these tears that we will end our long separation and find ourselves at the feet of our Beloved. By his will, and by the fact of our initiation, our future is the eternal bliss of union.

> The one to whom’s unveiled the mystery of love Exists no longer, but is annihilated in love.
> Place before the sun a burning candle,
> See how its shining disappears before those lights: The candle exists no longer, is transfigured into Light. There are no more signs of it; it itself becomes a Sign.
> <sub>Rumi_,_ as rendered by Andrew Harvey in _The Teachings of Rumi_</sub>

## For God So Loved Us

The relationship between the Lord and the Master and us, his disciples, is an interesting one. In general, the dominant figure on the path is that of our Master. Yet this is ultimately a path of God-realization: a path that seeks to reunite the individual soul with its source that is God, the Father.

In fact it is quite easy to lose sight of God – the ultimate destination
-given the fact that we cannot see him or relate to him directly in any way, while we can relate to the Master. There is no doubt that for most of us the Master is the crucial, pivotal figure on the path of Sant Mat. Yet our strong bond with our Master, our desperate desire to love and be loved by him, must not blind us to God’s presence and role in the whole scheme of things. He is after all the Creator.

In one of the poems in _The Odes of Solomon_ we find the key to discovering what our relationship with the Lord really is. The key is love, of course. But it starts with love for our Master. The poet tells us:

> I should not have known how to love the Lord if He had not loved me.
> For who is able to know love, except he who is loved?
> I love the Beloved and my soul loves him, and where his rest is, there too am I. And I shall be no stranger at His door, for there is no begrudging with the Lord Most High and Merciful.
> I have been united to Him because the lover found the Beloved.
> And because I love him that is the Son, I shall become a son,
> For he who is joined to him who is immortal, he, too, will become immortal.

So we will become immortal through our love for the Master.

Most of us have heard a great deal about the Lord God but very few, if any, have actually heard him or seen him. Yet he wishes to communicate with us. But he chooses to do this through the physical embodiment of his very own Shabd form: the Master.

The Master can tell us all about God because he is a soul that has reunited with the divine source. He is in constant communication with that divine source, while simultaneously being here at this level in a human body. In this way he forms a bridge between God and man.

These souls who have realized the Lord are one with God and in fact have his powers, and they could be anywhere, doing anything they choose. Yet they remain here at this dirty level of creation out of love. It is the Master who collects souls that are lost and lonely and takes them home. Were it not for our Master’s intervention in our lives, we would never even think of God, let alone find our way back to him.

This is how the seventh ode from _The Odes of Solomon_ speaks of the Master:

> My joy is in the Lord, and my course is to Him: this my path is beautiful.
> For I have a helper to the Lord. He made himself known to me, without grudging in his generosity:
> For in his kindness he set aside his majesty.
> He became like me, in order that I might accept him.

While the Master is our own personal “helper to the Lord”, he is also the embodiment of the Lord’s qualities. Loving him is both journey and destination combined in one magnificent package deal. We cannot resist loving the Master. We all have a drop of divine love in us – that is our own soul. But the Master is no drop, he is a tsunami! And who can stand against such a powerful love?

In the Bible Jesus says: “For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I come out from God” (John 16:27).

That is the first thing God wants us to know: that he loves us and wants us to love him. The second thing is that he wants us to come home now. Many souls have begun to grow tired of this world and have started to long for a state of permanent peace and joy. These are the souls marked by the Lord for return to Sach Khand. The weariness, loneliness and longing that we feel are given to us by the Lord and they prompt us to respond favourably to the message the Master brings.

This message is quite simple. He says that he will give us initiation, teach us a technique of meditation that needs to be practised wholeheartedly, and then in time he will take us back to Sach Khand. It is the gift of initiation that will ensure our release from the cycle of birth and death in which we currently find ourselves trapped.

The Lord also wants us to understand how he can assuage those very feelings of fear and loneliness even now, if we will only turn to him for solace through meditation and constant simran. He knows we live lives of restless anxiety, depression and stress, and he longs to comfort us and give us peace. Out of his love for us he gives us access to it now, if we will only turn to him, love him and obey him – which we can do by following, loving and obeying our Master.

At the time of initiation the Master places his radiant Shabd form within each of his disciples, and from that moment onward he never leaves us. He also explains to us that turning to the Lord for help in meditation and daily constant simran will always bring a loving response from God. However, if we don’t turn to him and use the life jacket held out to us, we shouldn’t be surprised to feel ourselves sinking. Nor must we blame the manufacturer of the life jacket if we begin to sink because we haven’t inflated the jacket!

Everything we know about the Lord has to come from a perfect living Master. Everything the Lord wants to give us has to come via a Master. Everything God feels for us will be expressed by a Master.

The Master is God’s right hand and he also conveys to us how we can please the Lord and thank him for his love.

We’re taught that there are two main ways in which we can please the Master and thereby please the Lord: We can follow his instructions implicitly and we can try to become more and more like him.

Obedience is not always the flavour of the month in this day and age, but it is the hallmark of a true and loving disciple. Obedience and love are two sides of the same coin. If we love someone or wish to learn to love someone, then we must be obedient to their wishes.

Obedience is a part of love. There can be no true love for the Master or the Lord without true obedience.

In the Gospel of St John Jesus says: “If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him” (14:23).

There it is. To love Master is to obey – to “keep” his words. What exactly does this mean for us? Obviously it means following the vows we take at the time of initiation to the letter.

And the most appreciated gift we can give the Master, and therefore the Lord, is our meditation.

There is yet another way to try to please the Lord, although the Masters themselves are too humble to stress this at any length.

However, trying to become like our Master, God’s beloved Son, would surely be pleasing to the Father. If he could see us trying to emulate our Master in word and action and attitude, surely he would look upon our efforts, no matter how puny, with favour and love.

The Master is our yardstick for good behaviour in every aspect of our lives. The Masters are the embodiment of obedience, love, energy, determination, patience, humility, kindness and sympathy. Every good and positive quality known to mankind is to be found in our Master. We need look no further for our role model and guide on how to go through life. The Master does want us to become sons and daughters of God; fully realized as he himself is. He offers us the living example of such a Son and is both the example and the means if we wish to follow in his footsteps and reunite with our heavenly Father.

This path is all about our heavenly Father, about his Son our Master and about his love. It is pure love that prompts the Lord to send his beloved Son, the Master, into our lives. It is pure love that prompts the Master to initiate us, care for us for the rest of our physical lives and then escort us home to Sach Khand. It must be love that prompts us to follow and obey our Master and in so doing, learn to love both him and God, the Father.

## A One-Night Dream

Scientists tell us that the creation as we know it started some twelve to fifteen billion years ago with the Big Bang. This was an explosion of an extremely dense sort of primeval atom, which sent particles of matter flying out into space. And some of these eventually coalesced to form stars and planets and constellations and galaxies. This is of course just a popular theory, and a debatable one, but it’s a theory that’s widely accepted.

What we do know is that everything that has come into being since that theoretical Big Bang consists of atoms – minute particles, each consisting of a nucleus made up of protons and neutrons with lots of little electrons flying round it. This is true for every single thing, whether it’s the stars and the planets or the trees and the birds or our own bodies.

What we may or may not know, though, is that while everything is made of atoms and that an atom consists of a nucleus and electrons, these make up less than one percent of the volume of an atom. The rest consists of … nothing. Empty space. Everything that seems so solid and real to us is mostly nothing – just empty space. That’s what scientists have proved: that our world is not what we think. It’s mostly just an illusion.

And that’s something that the mystics have also been telling us for as long as they’ve been walking this earth with us. It’s an illusion. But it’s an illusion that’ll keep us trapped in this material creation until we learn to see it for what it is.

In _Sar Bachan_ Soami Ji warns us to make the best possible use of this human birth and free ourselves from this world of illusion:

> You have received this rare human form and this opportunity may not come again.
> The pleasures of wife, children, wealth, property and social repute will ultimately end in pain.
> Save yourself from these, sit in the company of the Master and seek refuge in him.
> This whole play is but a one-night dream and I have now woken you up.

Just about all the Masters describe this world as illusion – a play, a ‘one-night dream’ as Soami Ji puts it. It’s a play or a dream in which souls only occasionally get the opportunity to play a human role.

The vast majority of people don’t even realize what a privilege this is because they’re fast asleep. That is, unless they’re extremely lucky and a Master wakes them up; unless he grants them initiation and teaches them a method to gradually free them from this trap.

But even if we come into contact with a Master, still we seem to spend most of our lives caught up in the illusion. It’s what we’ve been used to for so long. We just can’t break free of it, because we think of the world as our home. And we’ve become comfortable in this trap.

The Masters describe this world as a dream, a play, in which each one of us is playing an allotted part. And they emphasize that, as in a play, our attachments here are unreal and only for the purpose of working off our karmas. We have debts to pay to some people and debts to collect from others. We have rewards to reap from good actions in the past and penalties to pay for actions that were not so good. Or rather, we have lessons to learn, to teach us the consequences of our actions.

But do we learn? Sadly, we usually do not. Maharaj Charan Singh used to tell us that if we did learn from our mistakes, we wouldn’t keep making them. Most of our thoughts, words and deeds are the result of old conditioning. We find it difficult to unlearn old patterns of behaviour. And we find it difficult to loosen our hold on anything we see as necessary for our comfort. It never occurs to us that we’d be far more comfortable if we could let go of all those things that we think of as ours: my home, my children, my books, or car or whatever. And therefore we stay attached to the world.

There does come a time, though, when some souls start to feel restless in this world, when they start to feel they don’t belong here. This restlessness is of prime importance in the journey of the soul. It’s the mark of the soul that’s been singled out of many to return to its home. And once a soul has been drawn to the living Master of its time, that restlessness is transformed into longing for its Master – a powerful force that starts to burn away karma, attachments and lower desires, and focuses on uncovering one’s spiritual identity. Once this inner yearning takes hold of a disciple, nothing in this world can really satisfy him any more. He wants only his Beloved.

And this is all part of the Master’s plan. He attracts us like a magnet. He plants his love in us. And then he makes us long for him. And the fire of love and longing that starts to burn in us is what destroys our attachments for anyone or anything else. He also teaches us a way of life and a method of meditation which will slowly release us from the chains of the karma and turn our attention and desires away from the world.

But there’s more. We’re told that whoever wishes to tread the path of devotion needs to cultivate a level of detachment from worldly circumstances and people. A true disciple has to reach a stage of equanimity where he’s neither elated when other people praise him nor depressed by disgrace or dishonor. He has to learn that nothing can happen to him unless it’s the will of the Lord. And knowing this, he should never worry about anything, because worry will stand in the way of his spiritual progress.

All these qualities are the mark of a disciple who has learned real detachment. And if we look at ourselves we might think that this is a very far-off goal. Of course, if only we could see this world as nothing but illusion, detachment could come easily to us. But, as we know all too well, we struggle with this concept that everything around us is not real. Our logical minds find it really hard to accept that everything

-everything and everyone that have shaped our very lives – is nothing but illusion. At this level, these things _are_ our reality.

But what we can understand is that nothing lasts, nothing is permanent – not our health, our wealth, our happiness or our friends and family. In a moment they can be taken from us. And if we want to be spared the pain of their loss, we do need to learn detachment.

We need to free ourselves from the strong chains that bind them to us. What a blessing absolute detachment must be!

For a moment, let’s try to imagine what it would be like if we could see the world as a dream with no reality. Let’s imagine what it would be like if we could see our lives as nothing but a play in which we’re only playing a part. For one, we would become free of all worries, anxieties and fears because we would know that nothing is real. No one would be able to hurt us. No one would dislike us, and we would dislike nobody; we wouldn’t resent anybody or be jealous of anybody. In fact, we would never think badly of anybody, no matter what they did.

Can you imagine how free we would be? And how free of pain or distress? And because we would know that as we are only acting out a part, others too are only acting their own parts. No one could do us any harm, because their words and actions would be nothing but the words and actions prescribed for them in the play.

And while we could certainly feel love for everyone in our lives, there would be no restrictive attachments. We would not be plunged into sorrow every time somebody we loved went away from us. We would see that parting for what it is: somebody simply exiting the stage for a while, or even forever.

Even if we were to be seriously injured or ill, we would have a different perspective on our suffering, because we would know that this physical body is also part of the dream, and that it is having to go through certain experiences that may have to do with karma, but which cannot touch our real being, our soul. Even if we were to become destitute we would be able to endure it with equanimity because here too we would know that loss of wealth does not affect our real self, and we would probably know that the One whose child we really are would take care of us.

This is not to say that there wouldn’t be illness in our lives, or loss of wealth, or the loss of people who are dear to us. No, the play would go on. And others could continue to behave towards us in ways that might be considered hurtful. But we wouldn’t feel it so much. We would be free from the effects of just about everything, because we would see it for what it is: just part of the dream.

And this is how the Masters say we should try to see our lives in this world of illusion. Wouldn’t it be glorious if we could! But we are working towards that. With every round of simran, with every bit of meditation, we are becoming a tiny bit more detached from the world. Slowly it’s losing its power to hurt us or stain us with its dirt. It’s losing its power to tie us down. One day we will become totally free. One day we will become more like our Master.

## Man, Make Use of Your Life

By trade, lending and great effort a miser accumulated great wealth. He then decided he would spend one year enjoying his riches and after that he would think further about what to do with his future. But he had no sooner started enjoying his life of leisure and luxury when the angel of death appeared to take his life away.

He begged the angel of death – with every argument he could think of – for just a little time to enjoy what he had spent his whole life working for, but the angel was adamant that he leave now. Then he offered the angel half of all his wealth and possessions if he could have but two more days. Still the angel refused. Even for all his wealth the angel would not give him one more day.

So finally the miser asked him for enough time to write down one little thing, and the angel agreed. And the man wrote, with his own blood: “Man, make use of your life. I could not buy one hour for three hundred thousand dinars. Make sure that you realize the value of your time.”
> <sub>Idries Shah, _The Way of the Sufi_</sub>

> We always try to give the time we have no use for to the Father. Once we are rejected by society, by our children or friends, then we want to devote our time to the Father. When we become old and our senses don’t go with us, our eyes refuse to co-operate, ears and limbs refuse to co-operate – then we want to worship the Father. We have to give the best time of our life to the Father.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh as quoted in _Legacy of Love_</sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>August 2011 45</sub>

## Thoughts, and an Ant

It’s early morning. I’m having coffee and reminiscing over my misfortunes and what could have been better.

My thoughts progress to the path I have chosen, or rather, the one chosen for me. I make a concerted effort to bring my mind to the essence, to remember the teachings. Thoughts start moving away from the misfortunes, towards fortunes: to be sitting where I am, clothed, a place to stay, fed, kept. Thoughts remind me now how good I have it, saying I have no idea most of the time how good my life is.

For most of us this is a reality – this unawareness. In honesty I try to have faith in my teacher’s words: that all is written – that everything is part of a plan, that all is towards the good.

Suddenly thoughts jolt me: How, when it started seconds ago dwelling on my spiritual path, my mind started drifting away from the negative towards the positive. It occurs to me that what I busy myself with is what I become. And then thoughts at last silence me, momentarily focus me…

A black ant is walking towards me on the kitchen counter. Seems to be searching for something, probably food, I think. Been working long and hard to get here, I suppose. But I cleaned the counter last night, with an industrial cleaner, “… that might cause harm to you, ant. Here, let me help you…”

I look for a piece of paper, carefully placing it in front of the ant for it to step onto without effort. Willing it to trust. “I will not hurt you, ant.

I know you don’t know, but I’m going to put you outside in the garden where there are good things for you. No danger, lots of food, nature. That’s where you belong. Trust me, I can see it clearly.”

See it clearly? Can I? Do I?

Ant hesitates, mistrusting. It takes small steps onto the paper. I pick up the paper with the ant and slowly walk into the early morning sunshine, taking care. I put the paper down among the leaves for the ant to get off, and it does.

As I walk back, thoughts return. What have I just done? Have I settled an old debt or created a new imbalance? The ant must have been seriously shaken. After probably having worked the whole night, climbing vertical cupboards, struggling upside down, no doubt, to reach the top, towards what it was sure would be very good, it is taken away and put down somewhere else – where, initially, there might be daunting surroundings – scared, alone.

So, do I see? I smile as it strikes me, and I realize again I do not see. I almost laugh out loud as I tell my ego that I am not yet as conscious as I so wisely told the ant just now.

Who is the wise one here? Me or the ant? From a higher perspective, albeit still very limited, I could see what is better for the ant. It trusted me. So the least I should be able to do from this higher perspective where I think I am, is to realize how much higher the saints’ perspectives are. How they can see what I cannot. What they know that I don’t. How I am assisted every day in ways I cannot understand.

But more… Because the saints can see, they tell us that if we have faith and trust, they will show us the way. We can experience for ourselves the higher truth – experience the science of the soul. They suggest our actions and thinking, and if followed as prescribed, they assure us of the outcome. All we need is faith.

Kinder towards myself, I accept that I am here, now, and that I will struggle and fall. But this morning is bright with sunshine. For me and for an ant. And at last I’m silently reminded that my effort is all that is required. My sincere effort. And the faith of an ant.

## Book Review

**This Heavenly Wine: **Poems from the Divan-e Jami****

By Nooreddin Abdurrahman Ibn-e Ahmad-e Jami. Renditions by Vraje Abramian

Publisher: Prescott AZ: Hohm Press, 2006. ISBN 1-890772-56-9 (PBK)

Jami (1414–1492) is popularly known as “the seal of the poets” or “the final poet,” because he is recognized as the last of a long line of great Persian-speaking Sufi poets who, over a period of 500 years, produced some of the most beautiful poetry the world has known.

Jami spent the early part of his life obtaining a rich and varied education. Leaving his home in Jam (in present-day Iran), he studied first in Herat (in what is now Afghanistan) excelling in logic, languages, and the sciences. When he was about twenty, he moved to Samarkand (in present-day Uzbekistan) to complete his studies. By his late thirties he was one of the most learned men of his time.

It was apparently the unrequited love of a woman that opened his heart to a greater kind of love. While he was still nursing a broken heart, he had a dream in which a luminous figure appeared and said, “Brother, go find a beloved who cannot abandon you.” After this episode Jami returned to Herat and sought out the company of Sufis. At the age of forty, he met Sa’id al-Din Kashqari, a master in the Naqshbandi Sufi Order. Recognizing him as the luminous figure from his dream, Jami knew he had found the beloved who could not abandon him.

His initiation closed a circle begun when Jami was five years old. His father had taken him as a little boy to see an earlier Naqshbandi master who was passing through Jam. Even at the age of sixty-five, sixty years after this brief encounter, Jami commented that he still felt the joy from that meeting and believed that all of his spiritual wealth stemmed from the influence of that master’s glance.

Jami wrote many works during his lifetime, including a treatise on Sufism and a collection of biographies of over 600 Sufis. His major works in poetic form present epic versions of classic love stories, including those of Majnun and Leila, Yusuf and Zulaikha, and Salaman and Absal. The poems in this volume are drawn from _Divan-e Jami._

Readers may be familiar with the work of the translator, Vraje Abramian, from his renderings of the poems of Abu Sa’id in _Nobody, Son of Nobody,_ reviewed in an earlier _Spiritual Link_. In his introduction to _This Heavenly Wine_ Abramian describes the challenges of translating from the Persian (Farsi) language:

> Persian poetry by Sufi mystics often combines multi-layered content with awe-inspiringly polished form. It also draws on, and is informed by, a collective consciousness at least one thousand years old, and one
> … saturated by Sufi cosmology, and its many-layered manifestations.

Since English speakers largely lack knowledge of that complex world, Abramian has focused on rendering the message of Jami’s words, rather than attempting a direct translation. He has grouped his renditions of eighty-eight of Jami’s poems into the following seven sections: _My One and Only; Of One’s True Friend; Of You and Me; The Divine Music; Of Love; Of Wine and the Tavern;_ and _Jami, the Man, the Poet, the Mystic._

In his renditions, Abramian uses very little punctuation. Its absence forces the reader to slow down, allowing the poems to sink in more deeply, stirring the heart. As Jami writes:

 all you who read these lines read them with your heart and not your head for not his head but Jami’s heart has brought them forth

Jami speaks in vivid images – by turns bold, shocking, transcendent, funny, and paradoxical. For example, Jami presents his view of the world using one image, grim and disturbing:

 this world and all in it is a rotting corpse and the worldly are here for their piece of flesh and then he turns to another image to suggest how we should spend our time in this world: when the dawn comes be of the early risers during the day keep aloof better be as lowly as the dust on the road despised and rejected by everyone

Similarly Jami vividly portrays the miracle that the Lord dwells in his entirety in the miniature human form:

 heaven and earth are unable to contain a speck of your glory but this tight human chest You have chosen as your territory and yet He pervades everywhere, though we do not see Him: there isn’t a particle in creation that doesn’t carry your Light yesterday I was asking others for a sign of You today there isn’t a sign that isn’t of You

Jami also betrays a marvellous sense of humour: do not become attached to what life gives you here for in time you will give it to someone to hold your hand or to some dog to let go of your foot

In the section entitled _The Divine Music_, Jami speaks of the inner music and its power. He says that he needs no musicians or bards because he hears “the Celestial Song of Love’s Sweet Captivity”:

 though the entire creation is filled with this Melody the unawake can hear It not glory, glory, glory to the Musician to whose Tune every ecstatic particle in creation dances accordingly

The most common subject of Jami’s poetry in this collection is love and its mysteries. Jami speaks of its wonder, pain, frustration, anguish, and joy. He is alternately drunk with love and bleeding from its torments. Having been drawn far along the path of love, he speaks knowingly of its many facets, of its agony and its bliss. He writes:

> The ascetic’s lips are parched and the Sufi’s eyes are flooded woe to those caught in this Love for it burns both the wet and the dry

But he is completely clear that he would not trade his condition for anything. how beautiful it is to be snared by this Beauty glory be to the bird who is caught in Love’s trap

A magnificent image illustrates the power and endurance of love:

> I am all tears and anticipation now and though your company I am denied in this affliction when this is done and I am no more my dust will blow only in your direction

This book, when approached with an open heart and unhurried pace, yields countless fresh insights into the mysterious world of Lover and Beloved. It gives Jami the opportunity to tell us, in many different ways:

 you are Love’s creation look nowhere else for sustenance turn to Love

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## True Is the Lord

> True is the Lord, true is his Name, and infinite are the expressions of his love.
> All living beings pray: “Give, give,” and the Giver goes on showering his gifts.
> What then could we offer him for a glimpse of his court?
> What words could we utter that would move him to love us?
> In the ambrosial hours of early dawn, meditate on the true Name, and reflect on his greatness.
> Through past actions we attain the robe of the human form – through grace, the door to liberation. Thus we come to realize, O Nanak, that the true One is all there is.
> <sub>_Jap Ji: A Perspective_</sub>

<sub>September 2011 3</sub>

## The Path of Love

Sant Mat is a path of love. So why are we always wondering about our love? Wondering if we really have any or how to make it grow. We are always conscious of a sense of separation. No matter how hard we try, our mind still feels that the Master is a million miles away from us.

There are moments of effort and moments of laziness, and there are long periods of time when it seems that our spiritual development has nothing whatsoever to do with us. It all just seems impossibly distant, and we feel like children longing to be grown up.

But as time goes by, we are growing up a little every day. The Master’s love works a subtle spell on us. With time, even the way we see the Master changes. Rather than a deeply loved distant figure, he becomes more of a familiar presence, a friend.

Great Master, Maharaj Sawan Singh, put it so lovingly:

> Your worries and cares are Master’s worries and cares. Leave them to him to deal with. Having become carefree, your business is to cultivate his love.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

The gentle influence of his grace continues whether we are conscious of it or not. At a certain point, we start to realize its importance. The sense of being loved becomes a recurring emotion. We feel the sweetness of gratitude and want to respond. The desire to love him through the practice of our meditation grows.

We experience progress in subtle ways; it seems to relate mostly to our attitude, our view of things. The grace is so unexpected, and yet it is somehow delightfully familiar. In the end, we don’t have to go anywhere; it is all happening inside us. We feel deeply loved and so very much in love with the Master.

Maharaj Charan Singh said these beautiful words about our attitude:

> If we can learn to be indifferent to pleasure and pain, so that they do not take us away from our path, it would not only lessen the weight of our karmas, but they would also be paid off in much less time.
> If you can take what comes to you through him, then, whatever it is, it becomes divine in itself; shame becomes honour, bitterness becomes sweet, and gross darkness clear light. Everything takes its flavour from God and turns divine; everything that happens reveals God. When a man’s mind works that way, things all have this one taste, and therefore God is the same to this man, alike in life’s bitterest moments and its sweetest pleasures.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Discourses, Vol. I_</sub></sub>

This was echoed by the present Master, who recently suggested that for some of us, the whole of life is parshad. When he said these words, you couldn’t help but feel the presence of his Master, or fail to be awed by the loving humility of one perfect being towards another.

Sooner or later the simple truth comes home to us. We don’t have to love anyone as much as we love the Master. We want to be with him. He is our lover, our father, our mother. We may be hard-hearted, stubborn, and proud, but the sheer relentless weight of his grace, raining down on us day after day, cannot help but affect us.

Meditation is the only way we can accelerate the process. It is the only way to find the peace we need, to give expression to our spiritual love. It is the ultimate positive step**. **It allows us to focus all our efforts on dispelling the nonsense of life. It definitely changes our attitude toward life.

When we are meditating, we have the potential to experience a warmth, a satisfaction, which is so personal, so unaffected by others that we wonder why we don’t meditate all the time. We feel relaxed. We feel safe. No one can touch this inner feeling. Sitting in meditation, we realize we don’t have to be perfect, clever, popular, good-looking, rich or successful. Here, we can find sweetness that is its own reward.

Our simran and bhajan is our struggle to find that still place where we can be alone with our love. When we meditate, we are trying in our own small way to be real disciples, and then we know what it really means to have a Master, to want him, to know him, to be so close to him – and that’s when we experience spiritual peace and love.

> Beloved, take me to that Station where You Are, and I am not.
> <sub>Sheikh Abol-Hasan, _The Soul and A Loaf of Bread__,_as rendered by Vraje Abramian</sub>

## Lesson from My Master

> My Master taught me a lesson: “Any moment you are negligent in remembrance of God is a moment spent in denial of God.” These words opened my eyes to reality, and I fixed my attention on the Lord.
> I then placed my soul in his protection – such was the love I cultivated in my heart. Having thus bequeathed my soul to him, I died before death – to live in him.
> Only then did I attain the goal of life, O Bahu!
> <sub>_Sultan Bahu_</sub>

“Any moment you are negligent in remembrance of God is a moment spent in denial of God.” With this powerful statement, Sultan Bahu cuts right to the heart of the matter – right through the everyday worries, right through periods of doubt and longing, right through our concerns of “What do the Masters say about this? About that?”

First, he tells us that this lesson comes from the Master. This reminds us that the Master is the beginning and end of this path. What he says is what we need to do, no matter how daunting, no matter how difficult. The Master’s lesson, Sultan Bahu says, is this: The reason we are here is to remember God – not just in morning meditation, not just at bedtime, not just in times of trouble – but every moment. Anything less is a moment spent in denial of God.

How hard this is, yet we are told it is possible. We are addicted to thinking. Yet, like all addictions, this constant mind chatter is self-destructive. Of all the thoughts that go through our minds, most are unproductive – worrying, going over and over things that have already happened, stressing about what will happen or might happen, imagining scenarios of one kind or another. It seems unproductive to spend time in unhappy and stressful thoughts. We could be spending that time in bliss and stillness and peace. But we have forgotten happiness and have become habituated to suffering – self-inflicted suffering. Sultan Bahu reminds us that these moments of mind chatter are moments when we are in denial of God.

Have we forgotten that we came from God, that we basically are made of God-stuff, and that remembrance of God is remembering ourselves, our real selves? We are lost here, lost in the illusion that we belong to a world of pain and suffering, that we belong in a life where love is temporary and imperfect. We have forgotten that not only do we belong to a place of love and ever-growing bliss – in fact we _are_ ever-growing bliss. We are God, we are that perfection, but we have forgotten this. And we have forgotten it so thoroughly, so completely, that remembering it is an intense effort, a struggle, the hardest thing we will ever do. We talk about living in the world of illusion, but we don’t really believe it. We have forgotten that it is just illusion. Our thoughts are illusion. Our lives, our past memories, our future hopes and fears are illusion. There is only God. We strive to remember God because we think we don’t know who he is. But we do know him; our true self knows him. We’ve only forgotten.

The first verse of the Adi Granth is called the Mool Mantra, the root mantra. The verse begins: _There is but one God._

One God – that’s all there is: one God, only God. In the footnote to this line in _Jap Ji: A Perspective_, the translator explains that “There is but one God” doesn’t mean only that there is one, rather than two or three or four gods, but that _nothing else exists besides or outside of God._ Master often quotes this and similar lines in his satsangs. This is the most important thing to know – and not only _know,_ but to live – to remember every moment of our day. We are what we think. The Buddha says:

> We are what we think.
> All that we are arises with our thoughts. With our thoughts we make the world. Speak or act with an impure mind
> And trouble will follow you …

> Speak or act with a pure mind And happiness will follow you As your shadow, unshakable.
> <sub>_Dhammapada: The Sayings of the Buddha, rendered by Thomas Byrom_</sub>

Happiness doesn’t lie outside of us. And misery doesn’t either.

Suffering does not come from our relationships, our illnesses or our life situation. No event can make us happy or sad. Happiness lies within us. We can choose to be happy by thinking positive thoughts, by focusing our attention on the oneness within. Or we can choose to be miserable by thinking negative thoughts, by trying to control our outside world rather than our inside world. Now this choice, too, is an illusion – happiness and suffering are illusions. In reality, we are one God, one love, one Shabd, but because we are so strongly associated with the duality of illusion in our lives, we need to work from where we are.

It may help to understand why we are enmeshed in this illusion. We are stuck in this cycle of thinking and suffering because we think that by scheming and stressing we can keep control of our lives.

It’s been said that every thought we have is an attempt to defend our ego. This seems extreme – but think about it. Sometimes we are being productive, planning and thinking to achieve a goal, to produce something, but this is to make money or do something that will win us esteem or give us pleasure. Most of the time we are thinking unproductive thoughts in the lame attempt to defend ourselves – thinking about how someone did this or that to us, how someone was unfair, how we were hurt or persecuted, what we can do to counterattack, what we should have done or said, and what we will do or say next time. We all have listened to the rubbish our mind puts out.We know how illogical and absurd and inefficient it is – just the same hurts or disappointments and anger and worry, over and over. What do we have to do to stop this endless vicious cycle? We just have to stop it! And we have the tool our Master has given us to stop it: we have the gift of simran.

Once at Dera a young man talked to Baba Ji about his failure to do simran during the day. He said that he starts out with this firm intention to keep his attention in simran. He leaves the house, locks the door, and then drops his keys, and there goes the simran. He said he has tried and just can’t do it. After bantering back and forth with the Master about whether or not he could do his simran, the young man finally said, very softly, “I can do it.”

We are all like this young man. We have tried and failed, tried and failed. But our Master doesn’t care about whether we succeed or fail. He only sees our effort. We _can_ do it, though maybe not today, maybe not this year, maybe not in ten years. When another young man complained that his mind was so strong, his thoughts were so strong, that he couldn’t control them, Baba Ji just laughed and said something like: You think your mind is strong? It is nothing compared to the power of the Shabd!

Master will see our struggle and effort and unleash the power of the Shabd, but he can’t do it too soon because the mind will then think _it_ has done it.

The Master often asks something like: What’s so difficult about meditation? You just sit down, close your eyes, and let go! But how do we let go? How do we deal with our psyche’s natural need to hold on to our thoughts, to defend and protect ourselves?

Sultan Bahu gives us a clue:

> … and I fixed my attention on the Lord. I then placed my soul in his protection – such was the love I cultivated in my heart. Having thus bequeathed my soul to him,
> I died before death – to live in him.

So what do we have to do? We have to fix our attention in the Lord and place our soul in his protection.

The only way to escape our thoughts, to identify with our quietness rather than our ego, to let go of the need to defend ourselves, is to put ourselves under the protection of the Master. This is why the Master is the be all and end all of the path. Our ego knows only how to defend, and our only recourse is to put ourselves – our safekeeping – in the hands of the Master. And how, exactly, do we do that? This short prayer by Saint Teresa of Avila was found on a prayer card in her breviary after her death:
> Let nothing disturb you; Let nothing dismay you. All things pass;
> God never changes. Patience obtains
> All that it strives for. He who has God
> Finds that he lacks nothing. God alone suffices.

Once we truly put ourselves under the protection of the Master, we have everything we need. Everything. We start to build an unbreachable fort, where _nothing_ can hurt us, where all we need is God, where God alone suffices. We see everything in life as a gift from our Master. We don’t fight our fate but truly live in his will and remembrance, and truly find it sweet.

All we have to do is to follow the advice of Sultan Bahu, who followed the advice of his Master: fix our attention on the Lord and place ourself under his protection – one-pointed attention on one God, one power, one love.

## What Did You Do with the Gift I Gave You?

There is a story about a farmer who offered a drink of water from his well to a thirsty man, who was lost. The man refreshed himself with the farmer’s water and told him that he would return. The farmer thought little about it.

A few days later, the man did return. The farmer then realized that the man was a great and powerful king. The king smiled at the farmer, got down from his horse and placed a small bag with a seed inside into the farmer’s hands, smiling kindly at the farmer and telling him that it was a gift in return for his kindness. The farmer thanked the king.

The farmer was very excited that a king should give him a gift; his family was also overjoyed. The farmer sat and wondered what to do with his gift. Finally, after much mental debate, he took the seed and placed it in a fine sandalwood box with a velvet interior. It was the most valuable belonging the poor farmer owned – he then placed that box upon the mantel above his fireplace, so that all could see this gift from a great king.

And so, time passed; the farmer grew old. One morning, there was a knock at his door; he slowly opened the door, and here was the very king who had given him that gift so many years before. The expression on the king’s face was one of confusion. He asked the farmer, “Why are you still living in this hut? I would have thought you would have been living in comfort by now in some palace.”

The farmer now seemed very confused. He asked the king, “Why would I have moved? There’s been no good fortune that has befallen me.” The king then asked, “What did you do with the gift that I gave you?”

The farmer rushed to the fireplace and showed the king his seed in the nicely carved sandalwood box. An expression of great sadness came over the king, and he said to the old and tired farmer, “My dear friend, I gave you this gift to use; you are a farmer, you know that a seed must be planted, it must be watered, it must be fed. This is what guarantees the crop. I gave you a seed of the finest of seeds. Had you used it, planted and fed it, you would have received such a yield as to give you wealth beyond your imagination. This was the intent. Instead, you have received none of the benefits from my valuable gift. In addition, you’re old; you have not much time left in this life, even now, to benefit from my gift. It saddens me that you have denied yourself the riches and comfort that were meant for you.”

Just as the farmer appreciated the gift from the king but did not put it to use for his benefit, so might we appreciate our gift of initiation from the Master but not put the teachings into practice.

Maharaj Jagat Singh explains in the following quote that it is only when we go within and meet the Master in his Radiant Form that we truly appreciate the gift of initiation:

> I am glad that you appreciate the value of initiation, but the real appreciation comes only when by simran (repetition of the holy names) you vacate the body and go in. It is then that you will know what it is to have a Master and you will see for yourself what he does for his disciples. The real aim of initiation is to go in and contact the Master; then, with his help, and under his guidance, to complete our spiritual journey which begins from the toes and ends at the top of the head.
> <sub><sub>_The Science of the Soul_</sub></sub>

## Practical Submission

Judging by the number of questions asked of the Masters over the years about the subject of submission, there seems to be some confusion on our part. What exactly are the saints trying to teach us when they talk about submission? What good is it? Can it be experienced by all satsangis, or is submission something that can only be experienced by highly advanced souls?

In the book _Spiritual Letters_, Baba Jaimal Singh gives Maharaj Sawan Singh some very important and practical teachings on submission. He says:

> Nothing is going to help the individual except the Satguru, the Shabd-dhun, and his grace and mercy. So do your worldly work with the body, and the work of your real home with the mind and the inner hearing and seeing faculties of surat and nirat. Do the Satguru’s real work, bhajan and simran, and do not let the pride of anything enter the mind that is yours. No! Even if you become the king of the universe, you must realize that “I have no share in it. I am merely a labourer. Whatever is there belongs to my Master. I am nothing.”

We might say, “That advice might be good for Great Master, but he was destined to be a saint. That advice wasn’t meant for me.” However, one could argue that Baba Jaimal Singh’s advice gives deep insight into the nature of our suffering and offers a practical way to help us escape that suffering.

It may sound harsh, but Baba Jaimal Singh has accurately described our condition in the world. It is amazing how easy it is to spend an entire day, or an entire month, involved in thoughts of me and mine, and to seldom turn our attention to the Guru, apart from our morning meditation practice. Even in our meditation, thoughts of me and mine are difficult to still, largely because of the momentum that those thoughts have acquired during the day. We have given them free reign and empowered them with our attention. When we examine our lives, moment to moment, it is easy to see our self-perpetuating predicament and the scope of the task before us. We can’t do anything about the past days or months of heedless thinking. Thoughts can only be dealt with one at a time, in the present moment. And the only time to do this is now.

The Buddhists have a practice called “skillful means” that implies we can keep our attention in the present moment and be mindful of what thoughts are arising in our minds from moment to moment. Baba Jaimal Singh is proposing just such a “skillful means” practice, one that any of us can accomplish. When we can be mindful of the thoughts and images that arise throughout our day, we can see that most of them concern ownership. Thoughts of my body, my career, my possessions and my family can fill our minds most of our days. Baba Jaimal Singh tells us that each moment we spend entertaining one of these thoughts, “That very moment we turn our back upon Shabd-dhun.”

Apart from the spiritual reasons for wanting to control our minds, there is also a very practical and worldly reason. Our thoughts of me and mine bring us suffering. Worrying about our families, health or careers brings anxiety and depression. Thoughts of material acquisition and sensual pleasure bring cravings, inappropriate actions and suffering of many kinds. Even the experience of pleasure brings craving for more and the clinging fear of loss of what we have. Ultimately, our obsession with me and mine makes us unhappy.

The good news is that each moment brings a new opportunity for happiness. Within each moment we can bring the Master to mind.

It really is as simple as that. On the one hand, bringing the Master to mind invites us to a place of peace, on the other, bringing our problems to mind causes painful feelings. Why do we keep choosing the suffering of me and mine to the peace of the Master? It doesn’t make good sense. It isn’t practical.

As we spend more time in meditation contemplating the Master, this contemplation begins to be accompanied by happiness. When the saints tell us that the Master is always present, they are reminding us that to turn our face toward the Master is to bring his form to mind. Just to remember him brings an end to suffering in that moment. A thought is nothing, really. It arises, like smoke and fades into the same nothingness that it came from. When we entertain a thought we give it the power to make us miserable. We give it power over our minds.

If we let it naturally fade, what Buddhists call “self-liberate”, it has no power over us. Bringing the Master to mind allows thoughts to self-liberate. Bringing the Master to mind ends suffering in a heartbeat.

This is the power and grace of the Master. This is why the Master is indispensable on the mystic path.

Baba Jaimal Singh continues in _Spiritual Letters_: “It is a fact, my son, that except for Shabd-dhun nothing is our own. Believe firmly: ‘I am nothing; my Satguru is everything.’”

The Lord knows our minds are troublesome. That’s because we take ownership of our bodies, minds and possessions. We really believe we have acquired our possessions by our own efforts, and we personally claim them, until the day comes when we realize that everything really belongs to the Master. Until that day, we might have to imagine that everything is his. Let’s imagine that everything belongs to the Master.

When there is a problem at work, we can tell ourselves it is in the Master’s hands and not worry. When we have financial difficulties, we can have faith that the Master will provide everything we need, and not worry. When we have problems in our families, we can believe everything is happening according to the Master’s grace, and not worry. When craving for sensual pleasure arises, we can ponder whether or not satisfying the craving would bring us closer to the Master.

Why do we have to imagine? It is easy to say that we don’t have a claim to anything, but if we watch our minds, our thoughts betray our true attitudes. Until we actually realize the unity of creation, we have to imagine. We can say we _believe_ that everything belongs to the

Master, but if we behave differently, what good is that belief if it is only another thought? So we have to have faith that everything is in the providence of the Master until the truth is realized, and the truth will be realized through our simran and bhajan.

All this imagining can get complicated at times. We can get confused and even forget to use our imagination in this positive way. Worries and anxieties then can overwhelm us. What should we do? Bring the Master to mind, begin our simran. Maharaj Charan Singh said, “The Master never leaves us. He never leaves a disciple.” How do we access the Master who is always with us? If we can visualize his form, so much the better, but it isn’t necessary. Just the act of remembering the Master can free us from the thoughts that are making us unhappy. In the blink of an eye, a tormented mind can be set free. The antidote for the poison of ego is always available to us, but we have to take advantage of it. Simran is the key to this remembrance.

Remember the Master, remember the simran. Simran itself is an act of remembrance. The true gift of the Master is the Master himself. It is only through his grace that the Lord can be realized.

It is simpler than we think. Remember the Master. The act of remembrance will free us in any moment. Let not a moment pass without remembering him, and that eternity is all peace and bliss. Constant vigilance and constant remembrance will ultimately lead to union with the Lord. Very simple, but we can only do it right now, moment to moment.

> Those who reach the Truth do so by the Grace of the Lord and his Word, by the Message of his Messenger, by obedience to the Master, and through that effort which brings one to that Longing and Purity in Action in whose light one beholds the Beloved. Then nothing but the Beloved remains.
> <sub>Sheikh Abol-Hasan_,__The Soul and A Loaf of Bread,_ as rendered by Vraje Abramiam</sub>

## The Sun and the Shadow

Once upon a time the Beloved came and said:

I possess your love both day and night – but you’ll never be my companion as long as you remain yourself.

I am the Sun, but you are just a shadow, walking upon the earth.

Step out of hiding and walk into my light – once you’ve been erased, then you will be my closest friend.

<sub>Farid al-Din Attar, in _Love’s Alchemy, Poems from the Sufi Tradition_</sub>

## At the Very Least

There is an old story that goes like this:

The Lord said to a holy man, “Come, I will show you Hell.” They entered a room where a group of people sat around a huge pot of stew. Everyone was famished and desperate. Each held a spoon that reached the pot, but the handle was so long that it could not be used to reach their mouths. The suffering was terrible.

“Come now, I will show you Heaven,” the Lord said after awhile.

They entered another room, identical to the first – the pot of stew, the group of people, the same long spoons. But there, everyone was happy and well nourished.

“I don’t understand,” said the holy man. “Why are they happy here when they are miserable in that other place, and everything is the same?” The Lord smiled. “Don’t you see?” he said. “Here, in Heaven, they have learned to feed each other.”

This poignant story reminds us that when we act on principle, when we act selflessly, no matter how dire the situation, we create an essential element of heaven in our lives. Throughout time, developing character has been a goal of parents, religions, schools and societies. Children’s books are full of morality tales where good conquers evil, doing the right thing is rewarded, and acquiring virtues is discussed in the simple language of a child. Religious tales are replete with the deeds of goodness that triumph over all and stir the heart of the Lord within us_._ The Masters continually remind us that the qualities needed to become a saint are the very same qualities and traits that a good human being possesses.

As initiates of a true Master we meditate, we don’t eat meat, we don’t use alcohol or drugs, and yet the Masters seem to be suggesting that there is something more that we should be doing, since he exhorts us to also be good human beings.

Maharaj Sawan Singh, in _Philosophy of the Masters,Vol. III,_ discusses the necessity of imbibing virtues and qualities that would form a solid foundation upon which we could build our spiritual journey back to the Lord.

> The Lord is the storehouse of all virtues. The soul which imbibes virtues realizes the Lord and is dear to him. Such a soul is blessed.

Some of the most apparent virtues discussed are: not to injure the feelings of others; not to be rude; to give up desires and evil; not to talk ill of others; to do good even to evil-minded; to adopt truth, contentment, compassion and forgiveness. The list goes on and is both lofty and practical. It is almost a how-to manual for creating an internal and external atmosphere where our inner spiritual life can become strong and grow. As if to emphasize what it takes to win the favour of the Lord, Guru Arjun Dev, as quoted in _Message Divine,_ says:

> That knowledge is humility, that quality is simplicity, and that precious gem is the sweet tongue. The disciple can win the favour of the Lord by putting on the garb of all these three qualities.

Maharaj Charan Singh is quoted in the same book:

> We should conduct ourselves in a way that would be helpful in our spiritual progress. In our everyday life, we should hear and speak, read and write, do our daily chores in such a way and associate with people that the total effect would be conducive to our spiritual development.

God-realization should remain our ultimate goal and we should maintain a keen desire for the realization of that goal. Maharaj Charan Singh is quoted again in _Message Divine:_

> One who seeks to unravel the true mystery of life should first of all become a man in the true sense of the word.… He must possess the necessary virtues associated with man … [and] put stress on the attainment of these virtues.

The Masters are asking us to ponder over our actions before engaging in them, to act in a way that doesn’t violate the principle of interdependence, and to maintain harmony in the society within which we live. They remind us that when we seek to act nobly, we awaken within the qualities which will ultimately lead us to union with him.

To love God and his creation; to not harm the feelings of others; to have compassion, contentment, forgiveness, truthfulness, gentleness, charity and kindness make us not only better citizens of the world, but more fit spiritually. It isn’t the doing of one at the expense of the other. Maharaj Charan Singh as quoted in _Message Divine_ says:

> All the aforementioned virtues should be so assimilated by the disciple as to become second nature.… This is possible only when one’s mind has been cleansed of all impurities and has been engaged in spiritual practice with devotion for the
> Master.… With love for the Master in his heart and with regular spiritual practice, the disciple will increasingly imbibe all these virtues and will eventually attain those spiritual heights where Saints reside.

> The One who is beyond the intellect, speech and senses,
> Who is the unborn, beyond the mind, mayas and the three attributes,
> That very Supreme Being, the culmination of pure existence, consciousness and bliss,
> Displays the exalted behaviour of a human being.
> <sub>_The Teachings of Goswami Tulsidas_</sub>

## The Café

It’s a long way to the caravan _serai_ so you stop in at a small café along the starry road to astonishment. You tie your camel and step inside …

The sudden fragrance of rose seizes you with bittersweet nostalgia. Just a handful of dusty travelers here – Two drunks and a poet at first glance.

They greet you with a smile and a nod that says,

“We know what you’ve been through to get this far … ” then they sip wine that glows in the glass and makes their eyes shine with luminous silence that says, “We’ve already been where you’re going.”

Somewhere in the back room a lone dervish whirls round and round to misty music pouring down from a secret sky.

You smile and pull up a chair – A jovial bartender sets your glass. And the poet fills it to the brim with words from a wine bottle he keeps hidden in his shirt.

He knows you’re thirsty for words that speak to your ecstasy, for words that intoxicate your loneliness and leave you forever lost to the world you once loved.

He knows the exact place on this journey where you threw away the schoolbooks you had on your back.

There’s a huge pile of schoolbooks there left by each traveller who stopped trying to make love by the book of arithmetic and began to travel light.

Oh, this poet knows the kind of words you need to hear by the time you arrive at _this_ café! Words that make your gaze distant and wet with remembrance of the Lover you left behind so long long ago and who waits for you still at the end of this starry starry road …

## One Day We Will Die

Kabir Sahib wastes no words in explaining our ultimate fate:

> Like a bubble in water Is our fate;
> One day we will vanish Like the stars
> That with the coming of dawn Fade.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

How often do we even think about the fact that we will die one day – vanish from this earth? The daily media constantly reminds us how temporary and fragile life is.

Yet, many of us seem oblivious to the fact that one day we will be the one whom our friends will take to the graveyard or crematorium. We perhaps only think of death when a loved one or someone our age unexpectedly dies. Otherwise, we avoid the thought.

We instead occupy our minds with the pursuit of enjoyment, money, status and family. Maharaj Sawan Singh reminds us of this when he says:

> We are very clever about our worldly affairs and always make appropriate arrangements for their successful execution. But with regard to death, which has no time fixed for it and may come at any time – in childhood, in youth, or in old age – we have never given a moment’s thought.
> <sub>_Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. I_</sub>

Mystics advise us to reflect on the temporariness of our life and to consider its end, so we can leave this world with a peaceful mind and without regrets. Sarmad, a Persian mystic, put this question to us:

> My friend, you have wandered through cities, towns and deserts. You have followed the path of desires, pursuing a hundred passions.
> This caravan is reaching the destination and the journey is ending –
> Where have you been?
> <sub>_Sarmad, Martyr to Love Divine_</sub>

Where have we been? What have all our passions and desires brought us? Are we ever satisfied? Out of fear of the unknown, we keep ourselves and our minds busy, and try to ignore the fact that we will die one day. When we do think of death, we consider it a painful event, full of suffering, fear and grief. Associating it only with the sudden end of loving relationships and the irreversible loss of possessions is part of our ignorance.

Mystics experience death in a totally different way. They describe dying as the end of suffering, as merging into light and love, as going back to the Beloved, the Lord, and becoming one with him. For them death is not a painful end of a worldly life, but just a change from darkness to light. Maulana Rum says:

> It is not the kind of death that will consign you to the grave.
> It is, instead, a change that will usher you into Light. You need have no fear of death,
> For apart from your physical body you have other bodies.
> Therefore, do not be afraid to come out of this body.
> <sub>As quoted in _Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. I_</sub>

The mystics’ outlook on death is different from ours. They are conscious of the fact that human life is temporary, and they prepare themselves for the end of it, like Uwais, in a short story by Anthony de Mello:

> Uwais the Sufi was once asked, “What has grace brought you?”
> He replied,
> “When I wake in the morning I feel like a man who is not sure he will live till evening.”
> Said the questioner,
> “But doesn’t everyone know this?” Said Uwais,
> “They certainly do. But not all of them feel it. No one ever became drunk on the word wine.”
> <sub>_The Song of the Bird_</sub>

The fact that mystics realize that death may strike at any moment makes them live in a conscious way. During this precious human life, not only do they fulfil their worldly responsibilities and obligations, but they also pay attention to the purpose of this human birth: to become conscious of the presence of the Divine; to realize that we are not this human body but a spiritual being – a soul, a drop of the Divine. According to them, this human birth gives us the opportunity to merge into that divine ocean and become one with it. As Meister Eckhart says:

> It is your destiny to see as God sees, to know as God knows, to feel as God feels.

> How is this possible? How?
> Because divine love cannot defy its very self.…
> <sub>As quoted in _Love Poems from God,_ rendered by Daniel Ladinsky</sub>

In this beautiful way, Meister Eckhart explains that the destiny of all is to become God. Sant Mat teaches us that our purpose on this planet, in this physical universe, is to return home, to become one with God.

Or more to the point, our purpose is to rediscover the God that we are – that we have always been – and that our souls, hearing the Lord’s call, are spiraling upward on an inevitable inner journey homeward.

The Master repeatedly tells us that what will happen at the time of our death will be the logical conclusion of what we have done during our life. So if we follow the instructions of the Master and cultivate love and devotion for God in our hearts, the logical consequence will be that our attention will be focused on him at the moment we die. If we are sincere in our meditation practice, desires for worldly things will disappear, and only the yearning to meet him will fill our hearts. How could divine love resist such an honest and loving yearning? It cannot, says Meister Eckhart, “because divine love cannot defy its very self.” Divine love will be eternally true to its own being.

Maharaj Sawan Singh confirms in one of his letters that divine love will respond to our yearning:

> We are to leave this world one day, and if we are loving, obedient disciples, and have made proper preparations in this lifetime, we do not have the transition which we call death.
> While others weep, the spiritually developed soul departs happy
> – happier than a bridegroom on his wedding day.
> The time of death is a critical one in our experience, when our friends and relatives are helpless to render any assistance; but for the followers of Sant Mat, it is the happiest time of all. The Master appears and takes the departing soul with him, and puts it in its upward journey at the place for which it is fit.
> There is no rendering of accounts with Kal, provided there have been love for and obedience to the Master. The departing soul is happier than it has ever been before. There is absolutely no fear of death. The Master’s presence within breaks all worldly connections, and the mind is free to continue the upward journey.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Gems_</sub></sub>

The message of the mystics is clear: Recognize the transitory nature of this human life and prepare ourselves for our death.When we practice meditation regularly with love and devotion, we will not experience dying as frightening, mysterious or painful. We will experience it in the way the mystics do, as a change from darkness into light. This change heralds the end of our suffering; it heralds our merging into love, going back to our Beloved, the Lord, and becoming one with him.

32 Spiritual Link

## Master

> Please do not worry in the least. An initiate can never go out of the hands of his Master. His Master is always with him and is looking after his welfare.
> Apparent progress in meditation depends on many factors.
> The disciple’s duty is to go on meditating as advised by the Master and not to bother about the results. That is not his concern. This is looked after by the Master. Sometimes a cycle of karmas comes when meditation appears to have become a dry sort of affair without any progress, and the disciple feels as if he has been forsaken or that meditation is not bearing any fruit. Neither of these things ever happens, as the disciple is never forsaken by the Master, nor has meditation stopped bearing its fruit. Every moment that you give to meditation stands to your credit.
> <sub><sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub></sub>

> Since the Master is the human manifestation of Shabd, and we too are part of Shabd, when we meet the physical Master he seems very familiar. We may feel we have known him forever or that we have met before. In reality, at a deeper spiritual level, he is us. How can anyone be more closely connected to us? He is our own true Self.
> The only difference is that the physical Master is aware that his real form is that of Shabd while we are not aware of this truth. With the constant practice of meditation, the layers of misconceptions and illusions that cloud our perception begin to dissolve, and we start to see that the outer and inner Masters are one and the same.
> <sub><sub>_Living Meditation_</sub></sub>

## Jaundiced Eyes

The longer we are on the path, the more our weaknesses become apparent to us. If our flaws were forthcoming more quickly when we were new to the practice of meditation, we might become extremely discouraged. When our shortcomings are revealed to us gradually, we can cope with them more easily and improve on them without throwing our hands up in despair.

Two frailties that often reveal themselves as we travel the spiritual path are common to all of us: pride and jealousy. Guru Arjun Dev in _Jap Ji: A Perspective_ is quoted:

> Goodness does not even come near the person who proclaims himself good.

In another stanza he refers to a humble person by saying:

> Whoever considers himself to be lowly ought to be recognized as the highest of all.

Spiritual progress is challenging when pride clouds our vision, when we start thinking of others as undeserving, inferior, insignificant or even worthless. Only someone who is humble, who considers others greater, better and more worthy can be recognized as being fit to evolve on the spiritual journey. Maharaj Charan Singh says:

> The one thing all of us on the path of Sant Mat have to understand is the value of humility. Meekness and humility are great virtues on this path and unless we acquire them and do away with our ego and pride, progress is most difficult. Our ego and pride stand in our way and make the mind powerful and strong. It is humility which will rid us of our ego and self-importance.
> <sub><sub>_Quest for Light_</sub></sub>

When jealousy propels us to slander another person, Guru Amar Das advises us:

> It is improper to slander anyone, but self-willed fools indulge in defaming others. These slanderers, with their faces blackened, will fall into the most dreaded of hells.
> <sub>As quoted in _Jap Ji: A Perspective_</sub>

Jealousy is usually an underlying cause of slander and vilifying others. A jealous person might have a hard time accepting others’ happiness, honour, high regard and good reputation. By slandering, a jealous person thinks he can make himself look better and make the other person look inferior. In reality the reverse is more likely. He has probably not learned the truth of the statement, “When I blow out your candle, it doesn’t make my candle burn brighter.” In reality, the slanderer is looked down upon and thought less of in the eyes of others. The slanderer’s vision is blurred, so the merits of others seem like faults to him. His mind is weak and polluted with jealousy, tainting the way he sees the world and others in it.

The saints tell us that we see the world according to our own vision. In _Jap Ji: A Perspective,_ Bhai Gurdas tells a story of two men who are sent to a town. One is asked to find a truly good man and the other to find a truly evil one. They both come back alone. Bhai Gurdas explains that because the first man was jealous and prideful, he saw only people like himself, so he was unable to find a single good man. The second man came home alone because he saw himself as the lowest of the low, the least among human beings; therefore, he could see no one worse than himself. The two men were looking in the same town, among the same people, but they were unable to complete their task because what they saw in the town was a reflection of themselves. We see the world through our own vision, from our own perspective. If we see the world as a negative place, it is a reflection of ourselves, hence the saying, “Jaundiced eyes see everything as yellow.”

What is our vision? Are we looking through humble eyes or through jaundiced eyes? We make our own judgments of good or bad depending on our vision. The Masters ask us to improve ourselves rather than judge others through our own “yellow” lenses. When we awaken our consciousness through the Master’s grace, we would see only the radiance of the Lord in everyone.

> We are accustomed to pick out faults in other people. But this is not the way of spiritually inclined people. A satsangi or anyone keen on spiritual progress should try to find out his own faults and endeavour to give them up, one after the other, rather than find faults in other people. It is only a sense of superiority and of being above others that induces this habit in us, which is the very opposite of humility.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Sant Mat_</sub>

## Law of Action and Reaction

In _Jap Ji: A Perspective_ the author says:

When God fashioned the creation, he also established a universal system of laws to govern it. It is here that Guru Nanak explains the most important aspect of this system. He says that both righteous and sinful actions, both good and bad deeds, are not mere figments of the imagination but rather are a concrete reality.

In this world of actions and consequences, nothing happens without cause or without reason; nothing comes about by accident or coincidence. Whatever takes place here is either the consequence of a previous action or is a new action which will bring forth a new consequence. The creation is the land of absolute justice, absolute fairness. Except for the consequence of a committed action, there can neither be an award bestowed nor a punishment given. If we do not know the cause of an outcome, it does not mean that the outcome is without reason. Whatever actions an individual commits are imprinted on the mind. They remain with the individual forever. To face the consequences of his actions, an individual has to return to the creation time and time again, and thus remain tied to the wheel of transmigration.

The higher the distance from which a person falls the greater the impact. This law will not change because of a person’s ignorance. One is bound to get hurt whether one jumps from a ten-story building intentionally or falls from that height accidentally. Similarly, one has to face the consequences of an action; it is immaterial whether the action is committed consciously or unconsciously. When Guru Nanak states, “On reaching there, O Nanak, all is revealed,” he explains that those who do not believe in this law of action and consequence find out the truth when they reach the court of the lord of justice. Guru Nanak cautions us that non-belief in the law of action and consequence does not give one a reprieve from it. The universal laws apply equally and consistently to every individual. He says:

> Intemperate pleasures result in pain; over-indulgence leads to disease and ultimate decay. Without end is the suffering caused by such pleasures, and without submission to God’s will one must keep revolving in transmigration.

In _Spiritual Perspectives, Vol. I,_ Maharaj Charan Singh says more on this subject in response to a question from a disciple about clearing karmas:

How do we account for our karmas? All karmas have association with the mind, and the mind is slave of the senses, so, being slave of the senses, it collects dross. The soul has already taken the company of the mind. So all these karmas have become the master. The soul has become the slave, and the slave has no option but to dance to the tune of the master. Due to these karmas, which have become our master, the soul dances from one flesh to another, from one body to another. Unless the soul becomes master in the house, it cannot get free from the clutches of the mind and become one with the

Father. Since the mind is fond of pleasure, unless the mind gets better pleasure than the sensual pleasures, the mind refuses to leave the sensual pleasures. And that better pleasure the Lord has kept within every one of us at the eye centre, which has been referred to by different mystics by different names, as you all know.

So unless we withdraw the mind to the eye centre and it comes in touch with that divine melody within and we taste that nectar, that better pleasure within, the mind refuses to leave the senses. With that better pleasure, with the taste of that nectar, slowly and slowly the mind starts leaving all the sensual pleasures and has its direction towards its own origin, that is, Trikuti. When the mind reaches Trikuti, the soul automatically gets release from the mind. The knot between soul and mind has been untied. Now the soul is whole; the soul is free; the soul shines. Now the soul is no longer under the sway of the mind. Now soul is the master, and the mind has become the slave.

You can say you have burnt all the karmas, you have destroyed all the karmas, or you have risen above the karmas. You can use any phrase. It is immaterial. You have accounted for all the karmas, Caesar has been given his due. But until the soul leaves the mind, our karmic account is not cleared at all. Only then does the soul shine and merge back into the Lord. So this process helps us to untie this knot of soul and mind.

## The Mind

Is our mind capable of seeing the reality of the universe? Albert Einstein, in _Einstein: His Life and Universe,_ is quoted as having said, “Try to penetrate with our limited means the secrets of nature and you will find that behind all the discernable laws and connections, there remains something subtle, intangible and inexplicable.”

And Maharaj Charan Singh says:

> God gave us intellect to carry on the works of this world of phenomena. Beyond that our wisdom cannot reach.… One who relies on reason alone cannot attain true knowledge (knowledge of the Lord). Reasoning is the function of our physical brain.…
> God and things spiritual can be realized only by the direct perception of the soul, through contact with Shabd. The soul can perceive clearly without going through the process of reasoning. Our mind is too feeble and limited to comprehend the unlimited and incomprehensible One. It is the Lord’s will that we should rise above cold reason and fly towards him on the wings of love and faith.
> <sub><sub>_Divine Light_</sub></sub>

Still, we try to make sense of the world with our mind, and it persists in convincing us that its reality should be our reality. But what we seek is something more lasting, more true; we seek an absolute reality, we seek to comprehend “the unlimited and incomprehensible One.” So the problem becomes: How can true knowledge enter a deluded and ever changing mind? How can we transcend the world of relativity and duality?

The Masters explain that while the mind can be subdued for a short period of time through sacrifices and austerities, it cannot permanently be won over in this manner. Since the mind’s nature is impulsive and attached to the emotions, it must find something that is permanent and that brings real bliss in order to control it.

Guru Ram Das as quoted in _Jap Ji: A Perspective_ says:

> Every moment the mind rushes about in delusion and does not, even for an instant, stay in its home.
> When the Guru applies the goad of Shabd on its head, it comes back to inhabit its own mansion.

Guru Ram Das says that the powerful mind, which is always running after material objects, beauty and sensual pleasures, can be subdued through the “goad of Shabd on its head”. This suggests that we can convert the mind that we use to operate in the illusory world into a mind that pulls us inward and upward, towards the unlimited and incomprehensible. This is not so easy because of the very nature of its duality. Kabir Sahib as quoted in _Jap Ji: A Perspective_ says, “This mind is maya, this mind is a divine entity; this mind is also the essence of the five elements.” The mind is both divine and part of maya. It is when the mind becomes subdued through contact with the Shabd the individual becomes capable of seeing Reality clearly.

Kabir continues:
> When the mind realizes its essence, it is contented. One who knows the mystery understands the mind. Let no one delay the union of the mind with its source.
> One finds the Truth when one is absorbed in the Truth. Our business is with the mind – one who disciplines one’s mind becomes perfect.

When the mind merges with its source through meditation all impressions are erased and the mind becomes pure. The very mind which dominated the soul can then begin working for the soul.The mind and soul then become obedient to the will of the Lord. And what is the will of the Lord? As Maharaj Charan Singh says in _Divine Light_: “It is the Lord’s will that we should rise above cold reason and fly towards him on the wings of love and faith.”

> With both your body and mind, sit in the company of the Saints and you will receive the Nam that leads you to the true Lord, Satnam.… Your breath is like a drumbeat, constantly proclaiming the departure of the caravan of life.
> Radha Soami has docked his ship – come on board and cross the ocean free of charge.
> <sub>Soami Ji Maharaj, _Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub>

## Crack the Nut

Mevlana Jalaluddin Rumi resided in Konya, Turkey, during the 13th century (1207-1273). His Master was Shams al-Din of Tabriz (Shams), a famous saint. Shams al-Din of Tabriz met Rumi in a startling fashion. Rumi, at the time, was a traditional mystic scholar. Shams is said to have taken Rumi’s books, a representation of his intellectual brilliance, and thrown them into a well to show him how he needed to _live_ what he had been reading and writing. The subsequent inter-changes between them sometimes lasted for hours, and sometimes, even days. Rumi’s students became jealous forcing Shams to leave.

When Shams returned, the intimate hours of spiritual conversation began again. While the legend varies, it is said that Shams was murdered. Many of Rumi’s quatrains in _Divan-i-Shams-i Tabriz,_ which were written out of love and longing for his Master, describe his inner journey, and ultimately his intimate reunion with his Master.

Rumi says:

> Don’t forget the nut, being so proud of the shell, The body has its inward ways, the five senses. They crack open, and the Friend is revealed.
> Crack open the Friend, you become the All-One.
> <sub>_Unseen Rain: Quatrains of Rumi_</sub>

Who would ever think that a nut is proud of its shell? And yet, we who are spiritual beings going through a human experience tend to think that we are really the shell, the covering, or the body.

We are unaware of our true value, our divine heritage, our soul. We become engrossed in the body, its desires, its feeding and clothing, completely unaware of what is inside us, just as apparently the nut is unaware that its value is at its core, the nut or kernel within it and not its covering or shell.

> The body has its inward ways,

As the Masters repeatedly explain, we have a way out of this material plane. There is a door, a gateway at the eye centre. This is sometimes called the tenth gate. It is possible for us to journey inward with the mind. The saints tell us that the eye centre is the seat of the mind and soul knotted together. The mind, enslaved by the senses, has been dragging the soul through the mire of Pind for many eons, but, with the help of a living Master, the mind can concentrate at the eye centre and open that inner passage to the inner planes of existence, ultimately finding its true destination at its source. We are fortunate that we are in the human form where this doorway resides, so that we can go in and find our Lord and our true home.

 the five senses. They crack open, and the Friend is revealed.

Rumi is saying in this poem that when we have complete concentration and one-pointed attention on the Master, we will find him within in his Radiant Form.

> Crack open the Friend, you become the All-One.

Just as we crack open the shell and find the nut, when we delve deeply into the Master – when, in essence, we merge into him on the spiritual planes within – we find that he is really the “All-One”, the Sat Purush, God himself.

This is the real wonder of the path, that the Word has become flesh, that God has come down to our level in human form and walks among us as a human being. It is when we find him within, however, that we discover – the saints tell us – that he is one with God. By merging into him we are merging ourselves into God, achieving

God-realization, which is the highest purpose of human existence.

This is the road map of this path, the whole series of steps in a nutshell. But the journey of the soul is a long one, a difficult process, and Rumi describes it as sometimes seeming endless. The poem continues:

> Keep walking, though there’s no place to get to. Don’t try to see through the distances.
> That’s not for human beings. Move within, but don’t move the way fear makes you move.

As Baba Ji has often said, the Master is in charge of our spiritual progress. We keep asking, like the little kid in the back seat of the car on a long journey, are we there yet? Rumi says, don’t ask. Keep going, because doing our simran and our meditation is all we can do. Do it with love and devotion, do it with faith and hope, not with fear. Do it with determination until it becomes a habit; just do it. We have our simran, the five holy names, and the instructions given to us at the time of initiation. By following the Master’s instructions, we ultimately arrive at our destination, which is union with the Beloved.

The next verse describes a night of meditation that results in that inner union. The soul is being compared to a bird. Shams is said to have been known as the Winged One because of his spiritual abilities.

> I circle your nest tonight, around and around until morning

In this illustration, the nest is the eye centre, the home or roost of Rumi’s Master, Shams of Tabriz, and the circling is simran or his soul concentrated in love and devotion for his Master as he heads for the nest. Rumi knows he can find his Master when he enters the eye centre. However, it takes a very long time to concentrate the attention completely, and Rumi says his soul is circling that nest all night, “around and around until morning.”

 when a breath of air says, Now,

“Air” is listed among descriptions for the Shabd or sound current in _The Treasury of Mystic Terms._ So Rumi is saying that the sound current, the “breath of air” itself chooses the time for this union, which the Masters say is a natural occurrence when concentration is complete. Rumi continues:

 and the Friend holds up like a goblet some anonymous skull.

For Rumi, the “Friend” is Shams al-Din of Tabriz. For us, it is our Master. It is common in Persian mystic poetry to refer to the Master as the Friend or Beloved. It is also common to describe the intoxication of divine love as wine.

In the book _Sarmad: Martyr to Love Divine,_ there is a chapter “In the Wine Shop” that explains the allusion of Persian mystics to the image of the wine, the wine seller, and the wine shop to divine intoxication, the Master, and the eye centre:

> I bid thee drink no other wine but this, the everlasting fount: A fortune of delight to count, in this brief hour of the world is thine.

> Give not this precious heart of thine save to the Loved One’s lock, to bind: Scatter not life upon the wind, nor live one moment without wine.

In Rumi’s verse, quoted previously, he says the Friend is holding up “some anonymous skull”, like a goblet. How often have we heard that we have to give up our head, our ego, to pay the full price and enjoy union with the Beloved? Our ego, is the obstacle between us and the inner Master. We pay the full price when we merge fully into the Beloved. Here is a graphic image of Rumi, no longer conscious of himself, only experiencing his Master and about to unite with him in the intoxication of divine love. Can there be a more intimate, more compelling image of the reward for complete surrender to the Beloved?

## Book Review
**The Soul and A Loaf of Bread: The Teachings of Sheikh Abol-Hasan of Kharaqan**

Renditions by Vraje Abramian

Publisher: Prescott, AZ: Hohm Press: 2010.

ISBN: 978-1-935387-12-1

Little is known about the life of Abol-Hasan of Kharaqan (often called Kharaqani or Kharqani). A farmer and gardener, he was unlettered and never left his native village of Kharaqan. Of the purpose of his life, he said,

> My body is to work and replenish this earth, my tongue, to speak of this Love, and my head to lay at my Beloved’s feet in surrender.

His small Sufi lodge is said to have been the only such gathering place in tenth-century Sufism supported entirely from the saint’s personal income. The title of this collection of his poems and sayings comes from this verse:

> Whoever knocks on this door, feed him and ask not of his faith, for if he deserved a soul from his Creator, he certainly deserves a loaf of bread from Abol-Hasan.

To this little gathering place came such Sufi luminaries as Abu-Saeed Ibn-e-Abil-Kheir and Ansari of Herat, who wanted to be near and learn from the saint. Several of the Sufi orders that developed over the subsequent centuries trace their lineage back through Abol-Hasan.

The overriding theme of the poems and sayings in this collection might be said to be longing for the Lord. Abol-Hasan describes a lifetime of effort, driven by his longing for union:
> Tomorrow when they ask me,
> “What were you doing and what have you brought?” I’ll say, “This dog of an ego, which I spent a lifetime watching, so it wouldn’t fall upon me or others, and this mind full of filth, which I spent my life trying to purify.”

He explains how much longing is needed:

> Sit at this Gate and cry, a year, two, ten, twenty or thirty years. Finally, you’ll be asked, “What is it with you? What’s ailing you?!”

And he describes the union that follows, in all its profundity and mystery, in just a few words:

> I found my Beloved where I could not find myself.

Though his own path was that of longing, Abol-Hasan believed that the spiritual path is profoundly unique to each individual. He even said that there are as many paths to God as there are humans. To his disciple Abu-Saeed Ibn-e-Abil-Kheir, he said:

> Your road to the Beloved is one of joy and bliss, mine is one of Longing. Now then, you live in delight and leave me this Pain, for we are both doing the Beloved’s work.

Attar, a great Sufi poet living one hundred years after Abol-Hasan, told of another trait in Abol-Hasan – boldness. Attar wrote, “Abol-Hasan of Kharaqan … was the King of the Path … owner of the secrets of the Truth and … in boldness on the path of Love of such caliber that could not be described.” Abol-Hasan does praise boldness in his poetry:

> Don’t be meek in this Love, be kind to people, receive the wisdom of the Prophet’s teachings, but don’t be meek in this Love; for God is Bold and likes those who are bold in his Adoration … this Path is for the Bold, the Drunkard, and the Lunatic; with God, Lunacy, Drunkenness, and Boldness works.

And his verses exemplify that boldness – particularly those that take the form of a short dialogue with the Beloved:

> The Beloved said, “Abol-Hasan, do you want me to tell the world what I know of your wretchedness, and watch you be stoned to death?” and I said, “Do you want me to tell the world of your Infinite Tenderness and Mercy and watch the world stop praying to You?” and my Love said, “No more of this, neither from you, nor from me.”

Balancing out such bold exchanges are many other passages revealing Abol-Hasan’s position of utter humility and surrender before the Lord. For example,

> Choose Surrender, and your journey home will be short.

And,

_Do not go to your Lord carrying your penances even if they conquered the seven skies, do not go there feeling generous, even if you have given away the whole world in charity, and do not go there carrying your sins, for you knew when you committed them._
> Go there empty and broken.

Throughout the collection Abol-Hasan gives awe-inspiring glimpses of the intimacy and loving-kindness of the true disciple’s relationship with God. For example, he writes,

> Do not injure your Lord’s feelings, not for fear of punishment, but to avoid that sorrow that will assail you when you realize in truth whose heart you have broken.

And,

_Anyone I hurt once turns away from me. You I hurt daily, and yet, You are the One always there for me._

Abol-Hasan makes clear that the Lord is ever near the seeker. In fact, the Lord himself is the one who pulls the seeker to him, and who instills the longing for union in the seeker’s heart:

> The Beloved says, “I am the Road you travel, and I too am the Host that receives you; when you speak, I hear; when you think, I know; when you flee from me, I am your refuge; when you seek refuge, I am your shelter; your prayers I receive, and your hopes I fulfill;
> I am with you in desolation, and I am with you in your elation; be therefore Here, Now, in This Presence.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## Forsake Me Not

> Forsake me not, kind Master!
> I am a feeble woman, Helpless and devoid of strength;
> Forsake me not.
> You alone are my shelter, O Lord.
> I have no merits, Full of faults am I;
> You alone are faultless and powerful.
> I belong only to you, Where else can I find shelter
> Except at your feet?
> You alone are the jewel of my heart, You alone are Mira’s Lord;
> Except you she knows no other saviour.
> Pray save her
> From further humiliation Of return to this world.
> <sub>_Mira, The Divine Lover_</sub>

<sub>October 2011 3</sub>

## The Lord Giveth

> Far more than my destiny allows From your gracious hands I receive; Yet even my destiny
> Is but a gift from you to me.
> <sub>Urdu couplet, as quoted in _Legacy of Love_</sub>

As humans, we try to pass on to our children a better life than what we have inherited. Much of our definition of success and progress stems from this criteria. Do we have a better house today than we did ten years ago? Do we have a larger bank balance? Do we have the trappings of a more luxurious lifestyle corresponding to our social standing?

In this endeavour to make our life better, it is easy to get carried away in the rat race. The saints ask us to reassess both our perspective and our priorities. They tell us that everything in this world is impermanent – that which comes and goes is maya or illusion. They also ask us to appreciate that everything in our lives – whether good or bad – comes from the Lord.

So we need to keep a balance in life. When we lose what is precious to us – whether a loved one or a job we covet – we must remind ourselves that ultimately, it is the Lord that has decided that it should be so. While we may be quick to ask ‘why me?’ in times of adversity, we must reflect whether we asked the same question when things were going well.

One is reminded of the story of the Sultan who conquered a vast region. One of the old kings in that region whom the Sultan had defeated started to live as a recluse, spending all his time in prayer and weeping bitterly. This went on for many months until one day, the

Sultan summoned the old king. Seeing the old king’s lamentable state, the Sultan was moved and offered to return the old king’s riches. The old king responded, “O Sultan, it is not the loss of my kingdom that makes me weep. I fear the day of judgment when the Lord will say to me ‘O fool! It took an army and a crushing defeat to make you think of me. I gave you riches way beyond your needs, and in return, all I received was your thanklessness.’ “My fear, O Sultan, is that I will have no response to this judgment.”

The Lord has given us so many blessings. We must remember to be grateful children in times of prosperity as well as adversity. As Maharaj Charan Singh explains with simplicity:

> O Lord, if you were to make me a ruler of the world, I would have no other work but to worship you. If you were to have driven me from door to door through the world, still I would have nothing else to do but worship you.
> <sub>_Spiritual Discourses, Vol. II_</sub>

Of course, it is easier to thank the Lord when times are good. To accept difficulties as blessings is a much harder task. Kabir puts a different perspective in front of us by asking the Lord:

> By surrendering to you that which is yours, what can I possibly lose?
> <sub>As quoted in _Spiritual Discourses, Vol. II_</sub>

Quite simply, the harsh corollary of leaving behind a better world for our children is that we came into this world with nothing and we shall leave with nothing. Everything belongs to the Lord. Rather than thinking the Lord has taken something away, we should change our attitude to one of surrendering back what he has given us.

To a disciple who was going through a difficult time, the Great Master offered these encouraging words:

> Do not feel perturbed; after all, adversities do come to human beings. We should face them with patience and steadfastness. All days are not the same. When good days do not last, why expect bad days to persist? Much of our bad times have passed away.
> Only a little is left; bear it with fortitude. Satguru is within you and is every moment looking after you. Have faith in his grace and compassion, and do not feel dejected. Do not let patience desert you. Contemplate on the Satguru’s form and continue to attend to your meditation regularly.
> <sub>As quoted in _In the Footsteps of the Master_</sub>

Maharaj Sawan Singh beautifully explains that we must not feel dejected. Rather, we should be thankful, as the ultimate Giver has blessed us with the most beautiful gift of all – the gift of initiation. It is through this gift that we can pass through life and hang on to our sheet-anchor, our Master.

> My Beloved, giver of all needs, and their satisfier too, pray see to it that I need none but You, and knock on no door but Yours.
> <sub>Shaikh Abil-Kheir, _Nobody, Son of Nobody_, As translated by Vraje Abramian</sub>

## Something to Think About

Life is so simple and beautiful to live, provided one can rise above human failings. They always keep one entangled in the net of worry and misery, and we human mortals are just helpless spectators. If we can just withdraw this ‘self ’, then only can we enjoy this drama of life.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, as quoted in _Treasure Beyond Measure_</sub>
> ---

If a sightless person recovers his sight by an operation, he feels greatly indebted to the surgeon. The inner eye is millions of times more valuable. Without it we cannot see the Lord, and we remain wandering from birth to birth. The Master opens the inner eye to enable us to see the Lord face to face.

_---_
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _The Dawn of Light_</sub>

It is not only the mechanical meditation of giving two and a half hours and then forgetting it the rest of the time. Our whole day, every day, should be lived in Sant Mat. We have to live in meditation in our whole life, in our dealings with everybody. It is not only that particular time spent sitting in meditation that matters; it is our whole living that matters. We have to live the teachings. We have to live in Sant Mat, for Sant Mat, in that atmosphere, day and night. That helps in the long run, and not only the daily two and a half hours. It must be a part of our life. We have to live it.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _The Master Answers_</sub>

## Actions Express Priorities

Twenty-four hours in a day seem to fly by so quickly. Most of us barely have time to finish off the daily chores and the endless errands that we are expected to run. Sure, we wake up and attempt to do our meditation, but it does not seem like there is enough time to finish the two and a half hours that we have committed to.

The Masters have constantly emphasized that twenty-four hours in a day are more than enough to get both our worldly and spiritual work done. It only takes a thorough look at the way we spend our spare time to understand that, in fact, we waste time. We surf the Internet mindlessly, attend numerous social events, shop for more clothes in spite of overflowing closets, watch television programs till late night, talk for hours on end with friends on the phone – most of the time trying our best to find another topic of conversation to jump to. The truth of the matter is that most of us would even prefer boredom to sitting down and doing our meditation. When it comes to the rest of our worldly duties, we are forever ready and able to attend to them, but when it comes to doing our meditation, we become plain lazy.

This may seem a bit harsh to some of us, but in essence, is that not how we are?

Let us think about it – we choose to do all the things mentioned above, knowing that none of them will serve any purpose in this journey of self-realization. The Masters always ask us to think logically
-and in this case, do we? What will running after all this materialistic wealth and distraction help us achieve? Has it kept us happy thus far, that we believe by further indulging in the illusion, we will be forever happy? Maharaj Charan Singh says in _Quest for Light_:

> The aim of human life is the achievement of God-realization and if we do not find the way to achieve it, we have wasted the human life with which the Lord has blessed us.

It eventually all comes down to one thing – our priorities. We choose to add all the extra activities to our daily life and when they become so overwhelming, we complain that we simply do not have enough time for our meditation.

Even after years of being on this path, if we were to spend a minute to contemplate our situation, we would realize that we have hardly made any sacrifices in terms of our lifestyle. We have not prioritized Sant Mat, so when life in all its materialistic glory overwhelms us, we complain that we do not have time.

The truth of the matter is that we are trying to fit Sant Mat into our way of life rather than changing our way of life to fit into Sant Mat. We get carried away in the illusion and try to squeeze Sant Mat in somewhere. We have to constantly remind ourselves that we are spiritual beings going through a human experience, and not the other way around.

In _Die to Live_, Maharaj Charan Singh aptly puts it:

> Sant Mat teaching is very simple, but to follow it is much more difficult than it looks. It’s a constant struggle with the mind, and one has to change one’s entire way of life and one’s attitude towards life. To follow Sant Mat requires a complete transformation, so it’s not easy. One has to sacrifice a lot in life.

If we truly ask ourselves what sacrifices have we made to achieve our spiritual goal, how many of us could genuinely answer that we have in fact moulded our way of life according to the principles of Sant Mat?

It would help to remind ourselves that we are temporary residents in this world. We feel like we are here permanently and therefore have set up our lifestyles accordingly. We have to keep in mind that we are going to die someday; that is an eventuality that we cannot deny. By doing so, we will realize the importance of meditation and will make more of a conscious effort to prioritize our time.

> You have to dwell there; why crave and collect things here? Live in the world like a guest; do not get involved in the affairs of others. As long as the breath in your body comes and goes, adore the Lord’s Name. You have come to earn the wealth of redemption; do not gamble your life away to earn a few shells. This is your chance to amass the treasure of the true Name; gather as much as you can, for soon death will come.
> <sub>_Kabir, The Weaver of God’s Name_</sub>

## Memorable Quotes

_We would do better to judge ourselves first than to judge others._
> <sub><sub>Maharaj Charan Singh</sub></sub>

_So long as every word of our prayer does not raise all our feelings from the core of our hearts, we can derive very little benefit._
> <sub><sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh</sub></sub>

_Make so much effort on this path that even at the time of death, you fall forward on the path, not backward._
> <sub><sub>Rumi</sub></sub>

_The more a man is at one within himself and becomes single in heart, the more he understands higher things without labour; for he receives the light of understanding from above._
> <sub><sub>Thomas à Kempis</sub></sub>

_If only we knew how much we need God’s grace, we would never lose touch with him. Believe me. Make a commitment never to deliberately stray from him, to live the rest of your life in his holy presence. Don’t do this in expectation of receiving heavenly comforts; simply do it out of love for him._
> <sub><sub>Brother Lawrence</sub></sub>

_No one can describe the glory of the moment when the mind is still and the soul is in a state of complete absorption._
> <sub><sub>Soami Ji Maharaj</sub></sub>

## A Real Positive Attitude

Having a positive attitude is a fundamental aspect of the spiritual life. Entertaining good thoughts, staying optimistic in the midst of adversity, and steering clear from negative influences complement the teachings of Sant Mat and are an indispensable aid towards achieving our spiritual goal. In theory, it is the perfect plan. But from a practical perspective, how does one stay positive in a world that is constantly bombarding us with negativity?

_Be Positive_. This counsel is offered to us all the time. And it is a welcome reminder, especially when one is embroiled in the karmic retribution of everyday life. With a little introspection, we can look at the bigger picture, come to terms with our situation and perhaps, feel a little bit better about our circumstances – at least, for the moment.

As disciples on a path of love, there is a part of us that can accept in a second that everything is good; that everything happens for a reason and is ultimately beneficial. But to be able to apply this understanding intuitively, all the time, while being buffeted by waves of excruciating karma, is not easy – unless one has a real positive attitude.

A _real_ positive attitude is a natural viewpoint that is based on a wisdom that comes from within. It is an insight born of a clear understanding of who we are, what is the purpose of our existence and what this life is all about. Our spiritual life plays a big part in the development and application of this understanding.

In _Spiritual Gems_, Maharaj Sawan Singh explains that there are two ways of looking at this creation. From the top, looking down – the Creator’s point of view; and from the bottom, looking up – man’s point of view.

From the top, it looks as though the Creator is all in all. He is the only doer and the individual seems like a puppet tossed right and left by the puppeteer. It is his play and there is no question. Looking from below, or the individual’s viewpoint, one comes across variety as opposed to oneness. Everybody appears to be working with a will. The individual thinks he is the doer and thereby becomes responsible for his actions and their consequences.

The mystics explain that both viewpoints are correct; the difference lies in the angle of vision. From an individual perspective, we all look out at the world through an inner lens called the mind. Clouded by karma, attachments and impressions from our previous lives, our view is hazy and has a limited span.

Sant Mat teaches us that as the mind is purified and elevated to the eye focus by concentration, little by little it develops a healthier perception and, consequently, a clearer understanding. And, as the individual continues to make further progress still, the inner consciousness rises and one is able to appreciate a divine purpose in all things. It is clear, therefore, that the depth of one’s insight is largely dependent upon one’s level of spiritual understanding.

> The individual, clothed in coarse material form, sees only the external material forms. His sight does not go deeper than that. The same individual from Daswan Dwar will see the spirit current working everywhere.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

The path of Sant Mat is a journey to the highest perspective; to the single, most positive power in the universe – the One that supports and sustains the entire creation, the Shabd. The mystics assure us that every soul is a drop of this ocean of love, making us, by default, positive in nature. The only thing pending is our realization of this vital fact.

Thus, the perfect Masters implore their disciples to lead a way of life conducive to this awakening. Attending satsang, doing seva, reading spiritual books and remembering to do simran when the mind is free are all positive influences that assist us. They confine us within the orbit of purity and goodness and shield us from negative influences.

But most important this uplifting way of life cultivates in the disciple a humble need, the need to beg the Lord for forgiveness in the only way that invokes His limitless grace – meditation. It is in that inner sanctum of sweet solitude that the divine energy of the Shabd washes away the impurities of the mind, creating the impetus for a deep and profound level of understanding.

Ultimately, it is this precious understanding that becomes the basis for a real and enduring positive attitude. It helps the disciple accept his fate and go through his destiny with strength and confidence, without losing his balance. It is the inevitable outcome of diligent and loving discipleship – the beloved Father’s gift of grace to an obedient child for his untiring faith and steadfast devotion.

> Attitude is more important than circumstances, failures or successes; than money or poverty, illness or health. If we have a positive attitude, we will make the best out of even the worst conditions. If we have a negative attitude, we will be miserable even in the best of circumstances.
> <sub><sub>_A Spiritual Primer_</sub></sub>

## Walking the Spiritual Path

Walking the path of the Masters often seems to me like trekking through jagged mountains where one has to climb steep rock faces and go over ridges without seeing the peak. It is still an adventure of faith for me to tread this path, even though I have at my side the guide who prompted me to set out long ago, long before I knew of any Master actually living on earth.

On this journey, turning to the Master and looking up at him is extremely important, but it is not always easy to keep this ‘eye contact’ with the Master when one is feeling dejected or guilty on account of one’s lack of zeal and love. But Maharaj Sawan Singh encouraged his disciples to take even their weaknesses and failures to him; with nothing but their shortcomings in their hands, they could and should come to him. Therefore, in Sant Mat, those who feel that they have failed have every reason to go to their Master instead of covering their faces in shame as if to hide from him. Similarly, the Master of Nazareth once encouraged his disciples to come to him with their entire labour and heavy load, saying that he would give them rest.

Even if tangible success in meditation is a long time in coming, the years that a disciple spends trying to walk the path of the Masters are not spent in vain. “Every minute in meditation is important,” Maharaj Charan Singh once assured me. Not a single minute is lost, not even the time spent in seemingly unsuccessful meditation. Walking on the path transforms the disciple slowly but steadily. Every satsangi will be able to confirm this. When he looks back at the time before initiation, he will become aware how much Sant Mat has changed him and how the Sant Mat teachings also help him to master his worldly life. Many a disciple have confessed to me that without Sant Mat and the Master, they could not have coped with life.

<sub>Shraddha Liertz, _Adventure of Faith_</sub>

## You Snooze, You Lose

It could happen to anyone. We may wake up bright and early in the morning with a positive attitude, a clear and focused mind, reminding ourselves that our meditation is the most important task we shall accomplish today. But soon after a few rounds of simran, we doze off and are eventually lost in deep slumber. By the time we wake up, we realize that the majority of our time has already flown by and the time has come to prepare for the rest of the day. Sadly, many of us fall victim to falling asleep during meditation. What is worse is that it has become a habit for some – a habit seriously detrimental to our spiritual progress.

Some of us may take this situation lightly, perhaps even laugh or joke about the issue, thinking it to be a trivial matter. But we should keep in mind that sleep is an immensely vicious enemy – a challenging obstacle many initiates encounter during prayer. Maharaj Charan Singh has acknowledged sleep as a hindrance we must battle against.

> Sleep and idleness are two big obstacles in the path of all initiates, but we have to overcome them in order to achieve our goal. This is all a trick of the mind.
> <sub><sub>_Quest for Light_</sub></sub>

Though sleep is essential to rejuvenate the body, it is also a powerful and potent tool, employed by the mind to distract and dissuade us from devoting time to meditation. To further elaborate on the importance of active and alert meditation, Maharaj Charan Singh clearly explains:

> Only the time you devote to meditation is to your credit, and not when you are snoring and sleeping.
> <sub>_Thus Saith the Master_</sub>

During his days as a spiritual practitioner, Baba Jaimal Singh himself had to struggle and overcome this difficult challenge. Before attending to meditation, he would tie his hair around a nail hammered on the wall behind him. Therefore, if sleep would ever overcome him, he would immediately be woken up by a sharp and painful tug on his hair. He would then take proactive steps to wake up from his sleepy state before resuming meditation. This was his determination to succeed. This is how serious he was about staying alert. His example has always been a great source of motivation and inspiration.

There are several reasons why we fall asleep during meditation. We may have had a series of exhausting and strenuous days; or are facing insurmountable stress and tension over family issues or work. Our late night gatherings and the social events we partake in along with the heavy meals we consume throughout the day can be blamed as well.

There are endless reasons; but regardless of our excuses, as true seekers on this path, we must take full responsibility for our weaknesses and strive harder to achieve alert and conscious sessions of meditation.

Do we ever fall asleep whilst interacting with our family and loved ones? What if our country’s president or our favourite celebrity were to meet us? Would we take a nap in their presence? Do we ever doze-off watching our favourite television show or movie? If a student sleeps throughout classes at school or while attempting homework, could he ever learn anything?

Sleeping during meditation reflects our lack of seriousness on the path. Our actions essentially show that our worldly pursuits take priority over our spiritual quest; that we care more about a television show, or a coffee meeting with friends, than our daily promise of being in the presence of our divine Father. Instead of reducing our worldly pursuits, we try to meditate at the cost of insufficient rest, and thus fall asleep at the most critical time of our day.

> I do not know why, but in this modern society, we have so many types of engagements. We do not try to compromise with them, but we do compromise with our sleep and our health in order to fulfil those engagements. We would like to work all day and enjoy sleep all night, and from the sleep time we take our meditation time, disregarding what the body needs.
> <sub><sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _The Master Answers_</sub></sub>

As Maharaj Charan Singh accurately points out, our priorities are at the crux of the matter. If we are truly serious about the path, our actions must reflect our intentions. We can try to go to sleep early, avoid heavy meals, avoid late nights and manage our social calendar better. There is a lot of practical advice that we can implement in our daily life. We also know that we should sit upright – a straight spine helps us stay active and alert, compared with when we slouch. Maharaj Charan Singh has further advised:

> If we sit when we are still half dozing, then sleep overpowers us when we try to meditate. So if you wash your face with cool water, stretch yourself a little or move about in the room and thus refresh yourself, you may be able to avoid that sleepiness.
> <sub><sub>_Thus Saith the Master_</sub></sub>

We should do whatever it takes to overcome sleepiness. Meditation is our one and only channel to show our appreciation for the love, guidance, and support we endlessly receive from our Master. He has blessed us with his mercy and grace, and will tirelessly continue to do so. As his disciples, we should aim to uphold the teachings.

> If you get proper rest, you generally don’t sleep during meditation; but the difficulty is, we don’t take proper rest. We always try to sit in meditation at the cost of sleep. We don’t give proper time or rest to the body. When the body gets proper sleep, then of course you won’t easily fall asleep. It also depends upon your diet. If the diet is wholesome and healthy and light, then you won’t feel sleepy at all. If you tire yourself and eat too much and sleep too little, then naturally you’ll always be sleepy.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Thus Saith the Master_</sub>

## The Driving Force

Most dictionaries define the verb ‘drive’ as to guide, to direct, or to motivate. Whether we are driving a car or playing golf, we are guiding, controlling and directing at that instant. But what is the driving force in our life? What is the purpose of the things we do? Where is the road we have chosen taking us? Are we really going somewhere – or is our road taking us around in circles?

There are numerous circumstances, values and feelings that can drive one’s life. Below are some of the most common ones.

**Driven by Possessions**
The desire to acquire more can become the whole goal of one’s life. This drive to always accumulate more than we need is based on a myth that having more objects will lead to happiness. Possessions only provide temporary happiness. We eventually outgrow our material possessions and want even bigger, newer and better things.

It is also a misconception that if one gets more, one becomes more important. Self-worth and net worth should not be confused with each other. Our value is not determined by our possessions.

> Two verbs have built two empires, the verb ‘to have’ and the verb ‘to be’. The first is the empire of things, material possessions and power. The second is the empire of the Spirit, things that last.
> <sub>Saint Augustine, as quoted in _The Secret of Happiness_</sub>

The most common myth about money is that having wealth will make one more secure. Wealth can be lost instantly through a variety of uncontrollable factors, such as natural disasters like the recent earthquake in Japan, business failures or even stock market crashes. Real security and happiness can only be found in that which can never be taken away from you, such as your relationship with the Master and your connection to the Shabd. The fact is, without a tangible relationship with the Lord, man is a spiritual pauper. Do we want to strive for the wealth of this physical plane or the wealth of Nam, the Word that is waiting for us within?

**Driven to Create a Lasting Impression**
Many people want to be remembered after they have passed away. They believe that their purpose is to create a lasting legacy on earth. Yet, what ultimately matters most is not what others say about your life, but what the Lord says.

What we do not realize is that everything on this plane is temporary and never-lasting. ‘Ashes to ashes, dust to dust’. All achievements will ultimately be surpassed, records will always be broken, reputations will fade and fame forgotten. Living to create a worldly legacy is like building your house on sand. A better use of time would be to build an eternal legacy, by building on a spiritual foundation, which the Master has shown us how to do.

**Driven by Anger**
Many of us are driven at some point in our lives, by pain and bitterness. We hold on to our anger instead of releasing it through forgiveness. We relive the past in our minds over and over again. Some of us may close up and swallow our anger inside, allowing it to fester, while others may blow up and release it on others. Both responses are detrimental on the path of spirituality.

> The action of anger is to stir up strife, cause confusion and scatter the mind. Then it cannot concentrate. It is a fact of experience that no person can possibly concentrate as given by the Master so long as he indulges in fits of anger. It is an utter impossibility.… Anger is the extreme opposite of love. As love is the sum of all good, so anger must be the sum of all evil.
> <sub>Julian Johnson, _The Path of the Masters_</sub>

The Masters explain that all our relationships are the result of our past karmas. Whatever has happened in the past and whatever is happening to us now is the boomerang effect of our own actions. Nothing can hurt us unless we hold on to that pain. If we could let it go and forgive those around us, we would feel lighter, happier and closer to our Master. After all, the Master is all mercy and forgiveness. We would do well to live by these words:

> Lord, grant that I may seek rather to comfort than to be comforted.
> To understand than to be understood, To love than to be loved.
> For it is by giving that one receives, It is by self-forgetting that one finds, It is by forgiving that one is forgiven.
> <sub>Saint Francis of Assisi as quoted in _From Self to God_</sub>

Do we want to become a victim of anger? Do we want our lives to be driven by such an ugly emotion?

**Driven by Peer Pressure**
We all know how it feels when we try really hard to fit into a group, to be one of the gang, so to speak – when we try to be accepted and not left out, and when we allow ourselves to be moulded by other people’s expectations and public opinion. Unfortunately, those who follow the crowd usually get lost in it.

It takes a very strong conviction not to succumb to the pressures exerted by those around us. In trying to be accepted by the crowd, if we compromise our principles, we are most likely going to make decisions that we may regret later. The Masters always urge us to think for ourselves. They never try to influence us. In fact, they encourage us to satisfy our intellect before treading the path of Sant Mat.

It becomes very easy for us to justify our actions, even when we know that we are wrong, by saying: “It’s just a little lie, it’s just a tiny little indiscretion; it doesn’t hurt anyone.” But it does hurt – we hurt ourselves. The fact is, there is no gray area when it comes to right and wrong.

Let’s take the analogy of the human body: it is mostly made up of bones, tissue, veins and arteries. If the tiniest little vein were to become damaged or blocked, the consequences of that damage could adversely affect an organ, weaken the infrastructure of our body, leading to illness and ultimately even death. And if the smallest stone were to be removed from the foundation of a building, it would weaken the structure, possibly leading to the collapse of the building. It may not happen that day, or that week, but ultimately every action that we undertake will result in an equal reaction.

Do we adjust ourselves and our values to fit in with the world, or do we cleanse the chamber of our heart so that we can be worthy of the Lord?

We have posed many questions in the process of discussing each of these four ‘drives’, but the Master provides us with just one answer to all these questions.

There is a very beautiful analogy that Hazur would often give, about the child and his father going to the fair. While the father is holding the child’s hand, he is busy enjoying the sights and sounds around him. But the moment the child lets go of the father’s hand, the child cries. Without his father, the child is insecure, unhappy and lost. No matter how enjoyable the fair may seem, no matter how lovely the lights and sounds, nothing can compare to being with his father.

In the same way, if we want to feel secure, if we want to be happy, if we do not want to become victims of our emotions, if we do not want to get lost in the crowd, like the child, all we have to do is to call out for our Father. This is the one answer.

**Driven by the Shabd**
How do we hold on to the Father? He has given us the means – he has given us the connection whereby we can hold on to him and listen to his resounding voice. The Masters refer to this connection, this Sound, as the Shabd. In _The Path of the Masters_, it is referred to as the ‘audible life stream’. It is also known as the sound current or the Word. In the Adi Granth, this has been called Nam. Greek mystics refer to it as Logos. The Bible refers to it as the Holy Spirit. It is the one fundamental principle of all paths leading to God.

> Masters of all ages have emphasized this Shabd as the central fact in their system. This life stream is, in fact, nothing less than the Supreme One, projecting himself on all planes of life in a constant stream of musical vibrations through which flows the most incomprehensible power, life-giving and creative.
> <sub>Julian Johnson, _The Path of the Masters_</sub>

The force of the Shabd is always with us and within us. We only need to bring our attention to that focus where we can perceive it.

Human nature is frail. When we follow the path of spirituality, we begin to realize that we are full of weaknesses. Frailties present themselves in almost every conceivable manner and interfere with our concentration. But with the help of the Master and the Shabd, they are overcome, one by one, with every inch of the withdrawal of our attention from the outside environment of temptation and pain, towards the inner focus of love, peace and light.

 c c

SPIRITUALISTICKS

**Altitude Advantage**

<sub>**I wonder who that is up there?**</sub>

<sub>**Dunno,... must be an elevated soul.**</sub>

## The Master Answers
**A selection of questions and answers with Maharaj Charan Singh**

**_Q: Maharaj Ji, I practise as a doctor and I am sure there are others here who are lawyers. How far are we to go in our efforts in our work? In many cases you can extend beyond treatment. How far should we go?_**

**A: You should treat the patient according to the best of your ability, with the knowledge and skill that you have acquired. Still, with your best efforts, you can never get all the results that you want. If people could be saved by doctors and medicines, nobody would have died. We have no cure for certain diseases, though we do our best. We find that some medicine has cured some people, but others are not affected at all by the same medicine. We know all this, so we should try to use our knowledge to the best of our ability and then leave the rest to the Lord.**
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol. III_</sub></sub>

---

**_Q: What is the best way to bring our children up in Sant Mat?_**

**A: Bring them up lovingly and do your duty as a parent, and try to prepare them for love and devotion for the Father. Don’t try to condition their minds with any philosophy, but give them the general teaching of love for the Father. You have to preparethem for the Father and then let them make their own decision. Children are influenced by their parents and automatically start following them. So be a living example. That will be sufficient.**
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol. III_</sub></sub>

**_Q: Can we live a life of service to the Master – of body, mind and wealth – before our mind has risen to a higher level?_**

**A: Sister, the time we give to meditation is nothing but service to the Master. You cannot serve the Master in a better way than by following his instructions and living his way of life – attending to your meditation. This is the best service to the Master. You haveseen the gardener working harder on the trees that don’t yield any fruit, than on those trees which yield fruit. Those which yield fruit are actually helping the gardener by not demanding much of his time. They are serving the gardener. And those which don’t yield any fruit at all are making him work harder and harder, more and more. So we can serve the Master by following the teachings, and by living the teachings, thus bearing the fruit for which this human birth has been given to us.**

---
> <sub><sub>_Die to Live_</sub></sub>

**_Q: Are we protected by the Lord only after initiation? Suppose we are still seekers?_**

**A: The protection of the Lord is everywhere. When we sincerelywant to follow the path, when we sincerely want to go back to the Father, his protective hand is always on us. We should not worry about not being protected before initiation. Those souls who are marked to be initiated, who are allotted to a mystic, are protected right from birth in one way or another. Protection starts right from birth. They are not allowed to go so far astray that they cannot come back to the Father. When you fly a kite, you always have its string in your hand. The kite is flying in the sky. But whenever the person holding the string pulls that string back, the kite is pulled back. Similarly, every allotted soul that has been given over to the care of the Master is always protected by him right from birth, even if that soul is not yet initiated.**
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Perspectives, Vol. I_</sub></sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh

## To Sir, With Love

> ... My best friend,
> A friend who has taught me right from wrong, And weak from strong ... that’s a lot to learn. What can I give you in return?
> If you wanted the moon, I would try to make a start, but I would rather you let me give my heart,
> To Sir, With Love.
> <sub>Lyrics from the song, “To Sir, With Love”</sub>

The relationship between a Master and his disciple is one filled with evolving stages of emotions until the disciple matures enough to understand who the Master really is. Who is the Master? He is the Shabd in human form – however, it often takes a lifetime before a disciple can truly realize this. Before then, the Master takes on a series of metaphorical roles in the disciple’s life, often starting with that of a nurturing parent. He then becomes the disciple’s dearest friend and trusted confidant, and finally, his Guru or ultimate “Sir”.

Starting as a skilled parent, the Master understands each one of his disciples and the nurturing process required to take us from spiritual infancy through our rebellious teenage years into adulthood, until we can finally see eye to eye. We all mostly start at the same place, as helpless little infants clumsily trotting down this path in desperate need of his constant love and care. As babies, he knows that we require this special attention, and he tenderly swaddles us with it. However, the main task of any parent is to make their children independent.

As disciples on this path, independence means being able to soothe our own turbulent minds by sitting quietly in meditation and learning to turn within. Nonetheless, as tiny toddlers, we start to holler when we can no longer feel the warmth of his physical presence. But like any good parent who knows what to do, although he hears us, he patiently endures our cries so that we learn to seek him inside. And just as a child learns to calm himself, we start to meditate, and without even realizing it, we have taken one of our first major steps towards spiritual maturity.

As teenagers on this path, we rebel, become arrogant and often feel a strong disconnect from our special parent. Some of us become overly sensitive and feel misunderstood or even abandoned. But skilled as he is, he knows how to mould each one of us. For those of us who tend to be overconfident, he repeatedly sends struggles our way to teach us humility. Others lack confidence, so he constantly raises them up. Although at this stage of our journey, we may feel misunderstood, the truth is that he actually understands us better than we can ever understand ourselves, and works tirelessly to instil proper values in us, such as humility, sensitivity, understanding, loyalty, honesty, sincerity in thought and action. Basically he wants to mould us into good human beings. And with each of our personalities being as varied as they are, what a task it is!

With continued efforts in our meditation, we finally overcome this difficult stage and begin to trust the Master as we would a friend.

Looking back, we understand that everything he did for us was out of his selfless love. It is not that he did not hear our cries as infants – but he did not always carry us so that we could learn to walk. It is not that he did not understand us as teenagers – but he responded by giving us what we needed, not what we wanted. When we strayed from him, he never once abandoned us. The German nun, Shraddha Liertz in her memoir, _Adventures of Faith_, explains how, when she looks back on her life, she now understands this:

> But I was not forsaken; the Lord saw my hopelessness and despair. Although I had strayed away from him, he was as close to me as ever.

A time comes when our hearts swell with gratitude towards our special friend, our Guru and ultimate Sir for having taught us “right from wrong, and weak from strong.” How could we ever repay him – “What can I give you in return?” If he asked us for the moon, like the author of the song writes, we would probably “try to make a start”!

But the truth is, he would prefer our undivided hearts.

The legacy of any Master is his sangat. The best gift that we can offer our special Sir is to become living examples of the values he labours so hard to instil in us: to love one another, and to love him through our meditation practice. We can say, “It isn’t easy, but I’ll try.…” He knows how difficult this is, so he only asks that we put in our most sincere efforts and surrender the rest – “To Sir, With Love.”

> O Lord, You opened to me the doors of generosity and clemency, and my heart blossomed like a flower of a hundred colours – the envy of the garden!
> I could never describe even one of your thousand attributes, even if my whole being becomes a tongue to express my gratitude.
> <sub>_Sarmad, Martyr to Love Divine_</sub>

## Submitting to His Will
**A Letter to a Disciple**

In our everyday life, while adopting the principles of Sant Mat as our guide, we should be content to accept whatever comes to us because things are predestined according to our own karmas. This method we call ‘bhana’, or submission to his will. But this does not mean that we shoud be lazy or inactive. The idea is that we should do our duty fully and conscientiously, but leave the result to God; whereas if we go on praying for the fulfilment of our desires, we are not only lengthening the chain that binds us to this world, but will have to come back again and again.

We obtained the human body because of a mixture of good and bad actions. The result is that, in the course of our life, we are bound to have both pleasure and pain. If we were to feel elated at the time of pleasure or happiness and depressed or sad when in pain, we would always be praying for one thing or another, and would have no time for bhakti (devotion), without which our coming and going cannot come to an end. To complete our bhakti and avoid repeated incarnations, it is necessary that we submit to the will of the Lord.

When one feels very upset or finds oneself on the horns of a dilemma, one may sit in meditation and seek guidance within. The best prayer, however, is to ask the Lord to give us strength to face boldly and gracefully whatever is in our destiny.

The one thing that you should always keep in view is that the principles of Sant Mat are always to be kept in mind, whatever be your career. Whenever you feel puzzled, sit in bhajan, meditate sincerely, and after that, make your decision.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Light on Sant Mat_</sub>

## Man – The Architect of His Destiny

Life is preordained and every birth has been marked with its own uniqueness. A child may be cradled in the lap of luxury, bestowed with all the comforts at his fingertips and gifted with intelligence and fine physical qualities. Another could be born in absolute poverty, combined with poor health and living in utter misery. Why would one child be gifted with a perfectly healthy body while another may be born blind, deaf or even deformed? Why should an old couple, having lived life to the fullest, receive the devastating news that their beloved grandson has just left this physical plane due to a random accident?

Does God work arbitrarily and allow such inequality among mankind? Could this be defined as ‘injustice’? Or could this diversity of circumstances be attributed to happenstance or blind chance without any rational reason behind it?

In no uncertain terms, mystics and perfect saints point out that our life unfolds according to what we draw to it, as dictated by our thoughts and actions of yesteryear. Each and every current chapter of our life has been created by us, through our own actions which have germinated from thoughts that we once permitted to inhabit our mind. Our thoughts are fleeting, and thousands of thoughts stream incessantly through our minds each day. Although we can never completely divorce ourselves from the influence of our dominating restless mind, we can certainly choose which thoughts our mind should dwell upon. Whenever we dwell on any thought, an imprint is made on the mind. When a thought is repeated, we subconsciously allow that imprint or groove to become deeper. This ‘dwelled-upon’ thought eventually triggers a desire, and subsequently this desire is sculpted into the physical through our actions. Each act that we execute becomes a link in an unbroken chain of causes and effects, each effect becoming a cause and each cause leading to another effect.

Our thoughts and actions are the ‘cause’ and what is manifested into the physical is the ‘effect’. The fact that every action has some degree of influence upon the future means that we are personally accountable for the effects we indirectly cause. The exact day and hour that the effect will take place is never known to us, but the one fact of importance, which stands absolutely unalterable, is that the effect must take place.

> Man is the doer of his own deeds; as such he is the maker of his own character; and as the doer of his deeds and the maker of his character, he is the moulder and shaper of his destiny. He has the power to modify and alter his deeds, and every time he acts, he modifies his character, and with the modification of his character for good or evil, he is predetermining for himself new destinies – destinies disastrous or beneficent in accordance with the nature of his deeds.
> <sub>James Allen, _Mind is the Master:_</sub>
> <sub>_The Complete James Allen Treasury_</sub>

Strangely, we seem to think of everything, but never stop to ponder on the dominating thoughts themselves and the role they play in manifesting into actions. Our destiny is not something that is imposed upon us; rather we are, at each moment, spinning the threads of our deeds into the pattern of our future. Although we have no control over the causes and effects that have produced this present life that has been marked out for us with absolute precision, we certainly have a good influence on the seeds of our future destiny. In the book

_As a Man Thinketh_, James Allen writes, “Act is the blossom of thought, and joy and suffering are its fruits.”

From here on, we must make a constant effort to consider the mind as an instrument, for when its behaviour and its functions are understood, we have the capability to become its independent director and controller. Mind has never considered what is best for the individual except to act upon its own whims and fancies. In other words, it is not a rational entity. Therefore, the mind must be carefully kept under guard or else it will head for certain destruction.

By diverting our attention inward, through meditation, our thoughts can be regulated and channelled properly, so that nothing can permeate through our mind without our consent. Supported by a spiritual focus and the habit of clear thinking, the mind has the ability to discriminate and to eradicate its degrading thoughts. This is an important chapter in the individual’s life, for as the mind is slowly purged of all its impurities, his future fate undergoes a complete change, an entire metamorphosis. It is for this reason that man is known as the “master of his thoughts, controller of his actions and the architect of his own destiny.”

> The supreme lesson is that whatever is destined is bound to happen, and it is best to surrender to the will of God.
> And that destiny is the product of our own past actions: If you are wounded by thorns, you planted them; And if you are clad in satin, you were the spinner.
> <sub>Rumi, as quoted in _Sarmad, Martyr to Love Divine_</sub>

## Repartee of the Wise

A king visited the monasteries of a Zen master and was surprised to learn that there were at least five thousand monks residing there at that time. Wanting to satisfy his curiosity, the king casually asked the monk, “Exactly how many disciples do you have?” The Master replied, “Four or five at the most!”

---

A man travelled far to search for a true Master. When he came across one such Master, he asked one of the disciples, “What are some of the miracles your Master has done?”

“Well,” the disciple replied, “there are two kinds of miracles. In the country you come from, it is a miracle if God acts on someone’s will. In our country, it is a miracle when someone acts on the will of God.”

---

A disheartened disciple said to his Master, “If only I had the same kind of faith that you have, I would be able to live your life.” The Master replied, “If you follow and live my life, you will soon have my faith.”

## Given

The fundamentals in attitude, while may be correctly instilled into the novice on the spiritual path, do not take long before they are tainted with the ways and workings of the world. Meditation, a sacred and intimate space shared between Master and disciple, can often on our part be reduced to a mundane chore carried out rather reluctantly.

Perhaps on some level, we believe that the onus of the herculean task of transforming man into God lies on our feeble shoulders.

Failure to observe any visible signs of progress, coupled with the innumerable ‘fleeting of time’ reminders in satsang can easily add to the pressure, leaving one with the feeling of much disappointment.

The solution to combat this mental state blatantly stares us in the face in almost all of Maharaj Charan Singh’s answers, “Attend to your meditation.” He did not say, “_Do_ your meditation”, but _attend_ to it.

> Do you think your meditation is taking you up? Nobody’s meditation is taking him up to the Father. It’s absolutely wrong. It’s only the Lord and the Master who are uprooting us from here and taking us to that level. If anybody says, “I can reach back to the Father by my effort, by my meditation,” he’s wrong.
> Everything the Lord is doing himself. What are we doing? Leaving all these things to one’s own effort, one could never go back to the Father.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Die to Live_</sub>

Clearly, given our current predicament, we lack both the capacity and the thrust to even initiate the ‘A’ of spiritual progress. The reason is obvious: we are thinkers, employed by the mind attempting to think outside of its limitations. Encapsulated within the confines of time and space, the mind can only guess at best what unfathomable elevated states of bliss lie beyond its reach.

It is critical, therefore, that the spiritual catalyst that we so badly desire must come from outside of our petty and finite parameters. The aid cannot be self-induced. It has to be given. And given by a Power that itself is not confined to the limited.

The perfect mystics are that Power. They transcend both time and space, and are the epitome of ultimate love and compassion. How immensely fortunate to come under the shelter of such a Master, where we are externally blessed with a physical mentor who offers spiritual guidance, while simultaneously we are watched over and protected from within.

Attending to meditation, as the Masters instruct, is to be present in that sanctified space. While silently bearing witness to our limitations, we learn to surrender not only the act of thinking, but eventually also the mind itself. Having become free from the burden of all thought of results, we are left emptied, ready to experience the mercy and grandeur of his love. We realize that what we once longed for, and much more, has already been given.

> The Shabd is truly the essence of everything ...
> It is the greatest gift which can be given.
> <sub>_Tukaram, The Ceaseless Song of Devotion_</sub>

## Did You Know?

One of the objects of running the langar is to provide an opportunity for the satsangis to serve others. It increases mutual love and understanding amongst the satsangis. It enables them to rise above the narrow distinctions of the rich and the poor, of the high and the low.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, as quoted in _Treasure Beyond Measure_</sub>

> ---

So long as mind is our master, it will keep us on the wheel of birth and death. When we are its master, it will be our most faithful ally. Therefore, its control is imperative; and the object of human birth is to control it and thereby get off the wheel of life and death.

<sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

> ---

There is a very sweet and captivating melody in the Name, on hearing which the soul is attracted to the spiritual regions, just as a needle is drawn towards a magnet, since our souls, the Name and the Lord have the same common substance. By the attraction of the Name, the soul leaves the tomb of the body and rises out of it. Maulana Rum says:

“If I were to tell even a little about the divine melodies, the dead would rise from their graves.”
> <sub>_Philosophy of the Masters, Vol. IV_</sub>

## His Love

**Not Again**
Again, the mind revolts at the face of yet another turning point in life. Why are there so many crossroads, so many turning points? Why could life not just be a straight highway home? Just when we think we have nearly reached a straight path, it curves yet again. And the road never ends.

But what is it that is actually happening when these crossroads come about? There is a very inspiring passage in _One Being One_ that describes our situation and reminds us that the Lord may just want us to realize his presence through our struggles. The author writes:

> He constantly seeks opportunities to flood us with an awareness of his inner presence, if only we will acknowledge him just a little.… He cares for us, and is always ready to nudge us, to give us a gentle reminder of his presence.
> His reminder can come at any moment, often when we least expect it.… Or maybe we are in distress. Life has hurled its javelins at us, piercing our heart.… There is no clear way forward, and present circumstances are almost more than we can bear.... Or maybe we need to develop greater inner depth and sincerity. And with the kind of love we find so hard to understand, he sends us pain and hardship. And without our knowing, he simultaneously sustains us.… Or perhaps, our heart is dry, even disconsolate and, without our even thinking why, we pick up a book and happen upon a sentence or a passage that strikes us.… And inwardly, we are refreshed. In so many ways, each particular to our own selves, and to our own inner state at that time, he reaches out to us. Or rather draws us in – into the orbit of his love.… Such is the magic of the love with which he tends us, and which he weaves around us.

Each of us may have experienced that feeling described above. That feeling when everything seems to be a mess … but we still feel him.

That feeling when we are upset at the people around us, we are stressed and troubled, but we still feel his love. And _that_ keeps us going.

**Yes, Once Again**
So yes, just when we think we have had enough, and we want life to be a silky road, difficulties and troubles come storming once again. But, at least, during these painful moments, we feel his presence. At least, because of these difficulties, we call out to him, we cry, we beg, we make promises, we meditate.

And, at the end of the day, how big are our troubles anyway? There is a story that describes how a young boy’s older sister used to give him hair pins and rubber bands, pretending those were the keys to his bicycle. One day, the young boy lost his ‘keys’. He was undoubtedly afraid and this was a crisis to him. What was he going to do? But when he confessed his mistake to his sister, she just smiled. She was much older, and she had a better perspective. The Master has a better perspective as well. In the Master’s view, our severest struggles are nothing worse than lost hair pins and rubber bands.

He has already mapped our destiny out for us. We just need to have faith and patience. In _One Being One_, the author also acknowledges this, and sums up the state of serenity he bestows on us: “Time is no problem for the Being who created time. In the end, we discover that we … have always dwelt within the sanctuary of his love.”

## Blessings

A man went to see his Zen master and requested him to write something that would bless and encourage his family for the generations to come. It would be something that his family could cherish.

The Master wrote a few words on a small piece of paper, which he handed over to the man. The man gasped in amazement at what he read. The Master had written:

> Father dies Son dies Grandson dies

“What sort of blessing is this!” exclaimed the man. “Why would you write something so depressing?”

The Master gently explained. “My dear son. If your son dies before you, your family would suffer unbearable grief. If your grandson dies before your son, this would also bring great sorrow. Death is but the natural course of life. If your family should go in the order that I have written, therein lies the Lord’s grace.”

## The Gift of Mystical Darkness

On the spiritual path, there is a certain phase that seekers have described which reveals deep anguish and feelings of separation from the Lord. At the time of meditation, the disciple’s inner world is filled with an intense darkness and his heart feels cold, empty and alone.

The disciple longs intensely to meet the Radiant Form within, but feels incapable, as he believes his devotion is lacking. At times, the disciple may even feel abandoned or orphaned by the Lord.

Mystics and saints who have gone through this phase describe their pain using different metaphors such as: “the dark night of the soul” or “the cloud of unknowing.” Saint Thérèse of Lisieux wrote:

> He allowed my soul to be overwhelmed with darkness, and the thought of Heaven, which had consoled me from my earliest childhood, now became a subject of conflict and torture. This trial did not last merely for days or weeks; I have been suffering for months, and I still await deliverance. I wish I could express what I feel, but it is beyond me. One must have passed through this dark tunnel to understand its blackness.
> <sub><sub>_The Story of the Soul_</sub></sub>

What does one do during this most painful phase of the spiritual journey? How does one focus on meditation when faced with such unbearable inner pain? The mystics who went through this painful experience show us by example that they persevered in their spiritual practice despite how they felt. They begged for forgiveness for feeling abandoned by the Lord and asked for strength to go through this agonizing phase. They knew that it was only amidst their dark, empty prayers that the Lord would hear their cries of help, and so they continued with faith to knock and knock, persistently for as long as they needed to, until the Lord responded.

> Those of you who find yourselves in this predicament need to comfort yourselves. Patiently persevere and do not let yourselves get upset. Trust in God, who does not abandon those who seek him with a simple and righteous heart. He will not neglect to give you what you need for your path until he delivers you in that clear, pure light of love. You are meant to receive this great gift, yet it is only through the dark night of the spirit that he will bring you to it.
> <sub>Saint John of the Cross, _The Dark Night of the Soul_</sub>

The Masters explain to us that spiritual darkness is, in fact, a blessing in disguise. It is during this phase that we grow spiritually. We learn that we cannot accomplish the spiritual journey without the guidance and presence of our Beloved, thereby teaching us to believe in the Master’s grace. By going through the furnace of dryness, the pain of longing, our love for the Master becomes stronger and we develop the strength to persevere in our spiritual practice. When we diligently practise because we want to follow his instructions, because we want to please the Master, we are, in effect, building a strong foundation for our spiritual life. Our faith is strengthened and our meditation becomes our greatest treasure.

The mystics explain to us that this darkness does not imply that the inner Master is absent, for he never leaves his disciple; they assure us that the Master leads the disciple every step of the way throughout the spiritual journey, even when the disciple does not feel his presence. The darkness is there to teach us, to cleanse our inner hearts, strengthen our faith and make us fit to stand in his presence. If we were in a dark room and someone were to switch on the light suddenly, our eyes would momentarily hurt due to the brightness. In the same way, this phase prepares us to experience the true form of the Master. It is a necessary part of spiritual progress.

> Suppose you are going to fill some holder or container, and you know you will be given a large amount. Then you set about stretching your sack or wineskin or whatever it is. Why? Because you know the quantity you will have to put in it, and your eyes tell you there is not enough room. By stretching it, therefore, you increase the capacity of the sack, and this is how God deals with us. Simply by making us wait, he increases our desire, which in turn enlarges the capacity of our soul, making it able to receive what is to be given to us.
> <sub>Saint Augustine, as quoted in _When the Well Runs Dry_</sub>

Meditating in the ‘dark night’ is about being fully present in the tender, emptiness of our souls. It is not about turning away from the pain but learning to rest in it. As we grow spiritually, we begin to love the darkness and feel the need to pray more because we truly believe that beyond this veil, the Master awaits us with open arms. We begin to realize that the pain, longing and agony is part of the Lord’s plan to mould us into perfect beings. In time, we understand that the darkness is there to fill us with the light of the Lord’s love. If it were not for the darkness, we would not persevere for the Light; without his absence, we would not yearn for his presence.

It is through this mystical darkness that we travel towards the Light.

Moreover, just as the metaphors imply, we understand that this pain and agony is just a temporary phase, and we accept whatever spiritual circumstances he puts us in, for ‘the dark night’ will eventually turn into the bright light of a new day; ‘the cloud of unknowing’ will make way for the sun to reappear.

> Maharaj Jagat Singh

## Heart to Heart

Once a satsangi approached Sardar Bahadur Jagat Singh and said, “I want to ask your advice about the education of my son and about his career.” Sardar Bahadur quietly listened – at that time he was not the Master. I often used to go to him when he came here from Lyallpur. He would just sit quietly where there was a spare space in the upper room. He was a man of very few words. He would hardly speak unless it was necessary. If his answer was essential, he would speak; otherwise not. That gentleman was talking and telling him all the problems concerning his son. Then he added, “I have also asked the advice of the Great Master.” Sardar Bahadur said, “What! How dare you think I could say something different? And if you could not have faith in him, how are you going to have faith in what I can say?” Then he was absolutely quiet.

---

Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Heritage_

In a letter to a disciple, Maharaj Sawan Singh writes:

> Never think for a moment that you are at such a long distance from me. The Master in his Shabd form is within you and looking after you in every way. If you rise a bit more, you can talk with him when you like. Kabir says: “If a Guru resides at a distance, then direct the soul towards him, riding the steed of Shabd, and instantly the soul is in communion with him.” My connection with you is not limited to this life, but is for all times. All of us are to reach our own home, Sach Khand.
> <sub><sub>_Dawn of Light_</sub></sub>

## Book Review

**The Mathnawí of Jalálu’ddin Rúmí translated by Reynold A. Nicholson Publisher: London: Gibb Memorial Trust, 1990. ISBN 0-906094-27-5 (3-volume set in English)**

The Muslim scholar Jalal ad-Din Muhammad (1207-1273) was educated at the best Islamic universities of his day, and was respected in his community as a preacher, legal scholar and Sufi master in the spiritual line of his father who was also a Sufi master. Though born in what is now Tajikistan, Jalal ad-Din lived in the city Konya, capital of the Seljuk sultanate of Rum, in what today is central Turkey. In 1244, he met the Sufi dervish Shams-i-Tabriz (the “Sun of Tabriz”), whose light transformed him into the deeply venerated spiritual teacher whom history knows as Mevlana (or Mawlana) Rumi (i.e_._, our master from Rum).

In Shams’ form of Sufism (Islamic mysticism) one ‘annihilates’ one’s personality in the personality of the spiritual guide or teacher (_pir_ or _murshid_), as a necessary step towards ‘annihilating’ one’s personality in God. Ecstatic poetry, music, and dance, all in the name of Shams, began pouring out of Rumi. (After Rumi’s death, his followers would form the Mevlevi or Mawlawi Sufi order famous as the ‘whirling dervishes’.) The poetry, among the most exquisite lyrics of Persian Sufi mysticism, comprises the _Divan-i-Kabir_ (the Great Work or Collection), also called the _Divan-i-Shams-i-Tabriz_.

These lyrical _ghazals_ (odes) only whetted the appetites of Rumi’s disciples, who were devotedly reading the long didactic _masnavis_ (literally couplets) of Sufi mystics such as Sana’i (d. _ca_. 1131) and Attar (d. _ca._ 1221). In 1258, Rumi’s fellow disciple (of Shams) and successor-to-be Husam al-Din Chelebi requested Rumi to write such a work. Rumi responded with the famous “Song of the Reed” which begins: “Listen to the reed how it tells a tale, complaining of separations – saying, ‘Ever since I was parted from the reed-bed, my lament hath caused man and woman to moan.’ I want a bosom torn by severance, that I may unfold (to such a one) the pain of love-desire.” This poem in eighteen lines became the commencement of the _Masnavi-i-Ma’navi_ (Couplets of True Meaning), or more simply the _Mathnawi_ (also spelled _Masnavi_ and _Mesnevi_). Over the next fifteen years, with Husam as his secretary, Rumi dictated the six books of the _Mathnawi_ – about 25,000 couplets – now acknowledged as a Sufi, Persian and world literary classic. In honor of this iconic master’s 800th birthday, UNESCO declared 2007 to be the International Rumi Year.

Until today, the only complete English translation of the _Mathnawi_ appears in three of the eight volumes of _The Mathnawi of Jalaluddin Rumi_ by Reynold A. Nicholson, which was published starting in 1926. In addition to Nicholson’s translation, this eight-volume work contains Nicholson’s commentary and an edition of the Persian original. A scholar of Persian and Arabic literature at Cambridge University, Nicholson preferred to emphasize scholarly exactitude rather than literary beauty in his translation. For example, he uses parentheses to set his own interpretations off from Rumi’s literal words, and inserts many footnotes to explain obscure religious and cultural references. While many readers will be reassured by such a precise and exhaustive translation, others may find it a bit dry and cumbersome. The latter may prefer one of the many partial translations of the _Mathnawi_, such as the one-volume abridgement by E. H. Whinfield, _Masnaví-i Ma’naví, the Spiritual Couplets of Mauláná Jalálu’d-din Muhammad i Rúmí_. A list of other English translations can be found at http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Masnavi.

Even apart from issues of translation, the _Mathnawi_ isn’t always easy going for modern readers. Certainly, our ideas of good taste or ‘political correctness’ are different from those of Rumi’s thirteenth-century Persian-Islamic culture. As a result, the poem must be approached with good-willed tolerance – the same tolerance one might accord to, say, Dante, Shakespeare, or even Mark Twain. Nevertheless, and regardless of their religious affiliations, many readers consider the _Mathnawi_ to be the greatest work of mysticism ever written.

The _Mathnawi_ is a spiritual love letter to Rumi’s followers, engaging them with entrancing poetry but also innumerable stories, parables, jokes, anecdotes from history, scenes from everyday life, as well as references to the Qur’an and sayings of the Prophet Muhammad. Yet, however, entertaining the material often is, Rumi’s obvious purpose throughout is to teach profound spirituality. As he himself explains in the short Arabic prose preface to Book One, the purpose of the _Mathnawi_ is to reveal “the roots of the roots of the roots of the (Mohammedan) Religion in respect of (its) unveiling the mysteries of attainment (to the Truth) and of certainty; and which is the greatest science of God and the clearest (religious) way of God and the most manifest evidence of God.” In fact, scholars often declare that the significance of the _Mathnawi_ is not only Islamic but universal. Yet it is notable that Rumi does not achieve that universality by setting aside his Islamic religion and culture, but, as he said, by going to “the roots of the roots of the roots” of that religion. One fruitful perspective from which to read the _Mathnawi_ is as a reflection of the needs of Rumi’s followers – answers to their many doubts, advice for the ticklish problems of their lives and encouragement to struggle onward on the path to union with their Master, and thence the Eternal. Because Rumi is responding to his disciples’ interior as well as exterior needs, he doesn’t proceed in a linear keep-to-the-point fashion, but interrupts his stories with stories, pertinent discussions, and often direct challenges to the knee-jerk interpretations that the lower self

-
the _nafs_ – continually attempts to foist on unwary readers.

Rumi has much to say about this _nafs_, translated by Nicholson with such terms as the “ghoul-like soul”, the “fleshly soul,” or the “carnal self.” Rumi warns, “to regard the self as easy (to subdue) is folly, folly. O son, if you seek (to know) the form of the self, read the story of Hell with its seven gates. Every moment (there proceeds from the self) an act of deceit, and in every one of those deceits a hundred Pharoahs are drowned together with their followers.”

How is one to overcome this great and only obstacle, the _nafs_, and thus successfully traverse Rumi’s path? By seeking refuge with a saint: “Though you be rock or marble, you will become a jewel when you reach the man of heart (the saint)…. Go not to the neighborhood of despair: there are hopes. Go not in the direction of darkness: there are suns.” Rumi has the Almighty explain: “These saints are My children in exile, sundered from (My) dominion and glory; (They are) despised and orphaned for the sake of probation, but secretly I am their friend and intimate. All of them are supported by My protections: you may say they are in sooth parts of Me.”

In early December 1273, some fifteen years after beginning the _Mathnawi_, Rumi dictated the poem’s final verses (the last story is unfinished), and a few days later, on December 17, the mortal candle relinquished its flame to the eternal flame from which it had come. Aflaki, a fourteenth century Mevlevi, describes “Jews, Christians, Turks, Romans, and Arabians” flocking to Rumi’s funeral procession because “they had learnt from him more of the mysteries shrouded in their scriptures, than they had ever known before; and had found in him all the signs and qualities of a prophet and saint.”

The _Mathnawi_’s final story concerns “the injunction given by a certain person that after he died his property should be inherited by whichever of his three sons was the laziest.” Rumi describes the first two sons, and interrupts the narrative with an explanatory parable, but he never describes the third son, thus leaving the account unfinished. Yet he drops a hint: “The Gnostics are the laziest folk in the two worlds, because they get their harvest without ploughing. They have made laziness their prop (and rely on it) since God is working for them.” Perhaps this is a humorously-worded invitation to the reader to become that “laziest” son or daughter who, by relying solely on God, shall inherit the Father’s kingdom. The final encouraging words from this most sublime of poems: “for there is a window between heart and heart.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## The Master’s Philanthropy

Tulsi Sahib enumerates here the gifts that the Master bestows on his disciple. Not only does he guide the disciple in his daily conduct; he also gives him inestimable help in the spiritual journey within.

> Oh think thou deeply and deliberate; Without the guidance of a Master The way cannot ever be found.
> He will dye thee in satsang’s colour, Take thy soul to regions celestial, And reveal the firmament within.
> If thou desirest to revel
> In realms spiritual within thine own self, None will help thee except the Saints. In a short moment wilt thou depart,
> And thy body be reduced to dust. Thy Master alone, O Tulsi, will show The entrance back to thy Home.
> <sub>_Tulsi Sahib_, Saint of Hathras</sub>

<sub>November 2011 3</sub>

## Who Is He?

If I ask, who is the Master? you will say, Baba Ji. And if I say, yes but who is Baba Ji? you will say, he is the present Master at Dera in Beas. And if I say, yes but who is that person really? what will you tell me then? Here are just a handful of the hundreds of answers you could give to that question:

**A Perfect Father**
Master is our father. Master comes from our father in heaven, from Sach Khand. Master is our father on earth. From the moment that we were born it was destined that we should become the Master’s children. Master is the perfect father. He loves us like no other father could possibly love us. Even when we are disobedient he still goes on loving us with the same perfect love. And he loves us equally, with no special favourites in his vast family. The naughtiest, dirtiest child in the family gets just as much love from the father as the prettiest, purest and most pious child. Sometimes our father has to scold us, but the ticking off is always administered with kindness and compassion.

He is invariably aware of what is going on in our life and responds immediately and generously to any suffering that his children may be undergoing. Moreover, our spiritual father remains our father, even when his material body dies. Master never leaves us.

**A Loving Mother**
Master is not only our father but also our mother in so many lovely ways. He mothers us all the time, and most of the time we are unconscious of his motherly attention. Master takes us into his arms and embraces us as soon as we are initiated. He then looks after us, cares for us and brings us up to be good children – and eventually good spiritual adults. Master feeds us, clothes us and trains us. Master feeds us with the milk of Nam, which is the sweetest, strongest milk any child was ever given. “Nectar-sweet is the Guru’s Word,” says Tulsi Sahib, “but rare is the one who tastes it. Into him comes light, and he drinks the ambrosia. And he hears the Melody at the door of the Lord.”

Master’s milk is the sound current, that beautiful music which resounds day and night inside every single one of us. Like the good mother that he is, Master knows that the milk of Nam will make us grow spiritually strong and able to conquer all our ugly and infantile weaknesses. Master is a very wise and well-informed mother. He knows we are weak and feeble and shivering with fright, so he clothes us with the warmth of satsang. Without satsang we grow cold about the path, we become indifferent to meditation; we can even cool off about the Master. Master knows this. So he advises us to wear satsang in this world.

At satsang we are kept warm by our brothers and sisters, and we in turn keep our brothers and sisters warm. At satsang we can ask questions and have our doubts dispelled. At satsang we can hear Baba Ji talking to his children. Yes, we are his children; let us never forget that. And like every responsible mother, Baba Ji trains his children in ways of the spiritual world and educates them and tries very gently to get us to grow up. Everyone can understand our Master’s teachings. You don’t have to be a university don or doctor of theology to understand his teachings. In a nutshell, Master teaches us to leave this world while still living in it, to vacate the body and visit that secret place inside our head, to repeat the holy names, to see the light and hear the sound, to meet the Radiant Master and to go through our karmas in a happy carefree manner. What more is there to say? That’s all there is to Sant Mat. You go inside, go up, meet the Master and go home. It’s easy, isn’t it? So easy that mind cannot accept the simplicity of it and attempts to complicate it. Master knows this. Master is the all-knowing, all-seeing mother. So he keeps reminding us of his teachings. Master gives us his teachings on CDs and DVDs, in the books, in magazines and – most important of all – he gives us his teachings at satsang. That is why we must never miss satsang. When we miss satsang, we miss the teachings and our wild mind forgets the path and starts wandering all over the place.

**Our Brother**
Master is not only our father and mother; he is also our brother. Although the Master has unlimited knowledge and unlimited power, he deliberately chooses to limit himself by coming to his family in an ordinary human body. The Master could come as a king, as a president, or as a universally known TV personality and thereby command instant attention and respect. But he chooses not to. Instead, Master comes to his family as a brother, wearing the same sort of body as others and liable therefore to the same sort of diseases and discomforts as other brothers and sisters on the path. This is the great humility of our beloved Master. He conceals his greatness in an ordinary human body. He hides his divinity in assuming similarity and familiarity. So that we can become like him, he comes to us looking like us. This is most necessary. If God came to us as God, we would not recognize him, could not recognize him. We would be utterly blinded and totally deafened. We would be consumed in a split second, burnt to a cinder, like a dry leaf on a tree struck by lightning. So Master comes as a brother, with two arms and two legs, speaking the language of mortals. He calls us brother and sister, and by calling us brother and sister he is saying, as it were: “Look, you can approach me without feeling anxious. Come to me and tell me your problems. Let’s sit down together and talk things over. There’s no need to be afraid and overawed. I’m here to help you – here to help you get out of here and into There. So come to me as I come to you: as a brother, and let’s talk as brother and sister, sincerely, frankly and with brotherly affection.” Master doesn’t want us to stand on ceremony and be stiff and formal. He wishes us to be relaxed and informal in our relationship with him, and with each other.

**Our Friend, and More**
Master is not only our father, our mother, and our brother. He is also our friend. Master is the only true friend we have. Master will never let us down or leave us in the lurch. He is closer to us than our best friend. If we feel lonely and left out of this world, we should not be concerned. Our friend is not only in Beas, not only in Radha Soami books; he is right here inside us. Wherever we are, our friend is there with us, wanting to meet us. Wherever we go, our friend travels with us, wishing all the time that we would share our life with him. We have the best friend in the universe, yet we ignore him. How often do we think of this beautiful, faithful friend of ours? How often do we visit the Master? How often do we talk to the Master?

Master is Master and there’s no one like him, except all other perfect Masters. Our Master is ours: ours to see, ours to hear, ours to use, ours to love. Yes, our Master is living here today to be loved by us here and now. So let us love him, as our father, as our mother, as our brother, as our friend, and above all, as our Beloved.

## The Blessed

Saint Aelred of Rievaulx (1109 – 1167), termed ‘saint’ by the Christian church, was born in Northumberland, England, and became Abbot of Rievaulx in Yorkshire, an abbey belonging to the Cistercian order of monks. The following is an extract from his book _The Mirror of Love_, originally written in Latin. Its beautiful subject matter discusses the natural attraction of the soul towards God. Although Aelred describes “memory of eternity”, knowledge and love as attributes of the human mind, we would understand these as being qualities of the soul. That humans are “blessed” is a subject that is dear to many mystics and it appears in our own literature, for instance in a poem by Dariya Sahib where he writes, “Blessed is he who recognizes the Satguru…. Blessed is he who realizes the Beloved.” We are blessed not only in our origin (we have been made by a loving Creator, say the saints) but in being given the capacity to seek him.

Chapter 3: That man was made in the image of his Creator, that he might be capable of blessedness:

So, therefore, it was given to man at the creation of the universe not only to be created, nor yet, like the rest of created beings, merely to be good: not only to be beautiful or to be ordered, but, much more than this, to be blessed.

But since no created thing exists by its own creating, nor has beauty or goodness of itself, but from him who is everything, who is wholly good and wholly beautiful, it follows that the goodness of all good things, the beauty of all beautiful things must derive from him who is the cause of all existence, and therefore also that man’s blessedness is not from man’s self but from him who is wholly blessed and who thus is the blessedness of all the blessed.

Reasonable creatures alone are capable of this blessedness. Because they were made in the image of their Creator, it is seemly that they should cleave to him in whose image they are made.… This “cleaving” or “clinging” plainly is nothing to do with the body, but with the mind, into which its Creator has put three powers of nature, which make it able to partake of God’s eternity, to share in his wisdom, to taste of his sweetness.

These three I call memory, knowledge and love, or will. Memory can comprehend eternity, knowledge can comprehend wisdom, and love can comprehend sweetness. Man was made with these three powers in the likeness of the Trinity, of God whom his memory keeps without forgetting, his knowledge knows without deceit, his love embraces without desire of anything else. And in this is man blessed.
> <sub>Eric Colledge, _The Medieval Mystics of England_</sub>

> Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
> Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled.
> Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
> Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
> <sub><sub>Bible, Matthew 5:3-10</sub></sub>

## His Help Will Transform Us

Many of us ask ourselves, “Why are we in this physical world? Why are we suffering?” The Masters compassionately explain: We suffer because of our karmas or actions that have caused pain to ourselves and others. We are here because of our shortcomings, whether these be carelessness, apathy, ruthlessness or a thousand other weaknesses. Our poor mind is ignorant and blind; the senses tempt it and make it vulnerable. Because the mind is in the driving seat, we (soul) have taken wrong turnings, so ending up at a potentially dead end.

Rather than letting this fact depress us, or indulging in low self-esteem that causes us to carry on in the same way – “Well, that’s what I’m like, I can’t change” – we can actually turn ourselves around by calling on our Master’s help. He will advise us what to do and how to use our mistakes as an opportunity to grow towards love and freedom, and he will also supply endless support.

Some years ago someone told the Master that they were unhappy because they were living in a country that was full of problems. Their fellow citizens were being treated badly and it seemed a hopeless and negative environment in which to live. The question posed was whether they should run away and start a new life elsewhere so that they could find peace and contentment. The answer to this specific person drew on a striking image: _out of the compost heap grows a flower_.

Now, this beautiful answer applies to most of us personally as well as socially. Out of negativity, positivity can spring. When things get bad, it is often the time when there is an opportunity to change them for the better. If we become aware of our bad habits, and this stirs us into action, they can be seen as compost creating fresh growth and transforming negative into positive. But if we dwell on our negative ways and drop our head in shame, or carry on as before, we will just become stranded in a pile of waste.

When we truly want to change and transform ourselves, the Master plants the seed of a beautiful flower in our hearts and minds, and he will give us the power to water the seed so that eventually our soul flowers and fruits most beautifully. Also, if we seriously concern ourselves with the task our own compost heap presents (the chance to grow and develop), we will cease to worry about the ills of the world, as our time and energy will be given to changing ourselves rather than others or the environment.

When we humbly cry to our Master for help and, through his grace, take him as our mentor and guide, we do eventually reach the final step to true positivity and freedom, which is to forget about ourselves and just remember him. Then all we see is transformed into positivity and all we experience is perfect.

> Our most precious wealth is Nam. This is the one kind of wealth we should accumulate.… We should, therefore, carry on Nam Bhakti with abiding love, implicit faith and unswerving devotion. Then we will break asunder the chains that bind us tightly to the wheel of incarnation and death. Then we will end the recurring misery of endless lives and attain everlasting peace and bliss. Then the long separated drop will merge in the ocean and become the ocean. Then our soul will meet the Lord and gain liberation from the pairs of opposites forever.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Discourses, Vol. I_</sub>

## New Birth

Every death is a perfect culmination and finish for a particular life. Although we have created our own circumstances through the actions and reactions of millions of lives, it is so ordained that at the time of birth, we forget our previous lives and it appears as if this life is the only one we’ve ever had. Prior to birth, we hang upside down in our mother’s womb, with our new physical body being literally forged in a furnace of fire. Imagine the heat that is necessary to bake our bones into being!

At that time, and maybe for the last time for a long while, we remember the Lord; we are aware of ourselves as souls and we hear the sound current, that creative, conscious power of God, reverberating and sustaining all creation. And, indeed, how meditative a baby in the womb appears, abstracted and actually in another world. Attention at that time is at the tenth gate, the soul using its own faculty of seeing.

Apart from hearing, there are yet no sensory outlets for the attention to dissipate outwards. Even in the womb, a baby can pick out its mother’s voice and show preference for different types of music. Our conditioning for the life to come begins before we are even born!

We could imagine that the embryonic process of growth, development and birth might continue through our life with an inevitable mental, physical and spiritual maturation, but this is not the case. Within the passage of one normal lifetime, the three conditions of existence – the three _gunas_ of _rajas, satwa_ and _tamas –_ must appear: powerful growth, state of steadiness and, lastly, waning. This deterioration or waning applies not only to our mental and physical apparatus, but also to our moral sense. That too decays with age as we become more fixed and habituated to this world. With age it becomes more difficult to concentrate our attention at the eye centre, which, having run out for yet another life, is harder to collect. Except for our ego, everything gets weaker as we get older unless we have taken measures to transform our consciousness before death. If we talk to older satsangis, we hear them say: do your meditation now. Later on, if we have not become experienced in sitting in meditation, the body and mind will protest.

Part of the process of dying must be a huge realization of the sheer trivia that has gone before, enormous regret for things done and undone, and the sense of loss as we are torn from our attachments.

The Masters say death is terrible, and of course it’s terrible, because it’s part of the unnatural condition of being in the world – of having our attention habitually below the eye centre and outside the body. A metaphor Maharaj Charan Singh sometimes used was of a fine muslin cloth being torn from a thorny bush. The sound current, which gives us life, withdraws, and if we have not practised removing that delicate fibre, our attention, from where it has been caught in the ‘thorny bush’ of our body, we will experience pain. As Hazur Maharaj Ji said so many times, we will go where our treasure is; as our desires have been, thus will we become.

So much for body and mind. The soul, however, is always yearning to go back to the Father, to the Lord:

> When a soul (child) comes in the world we say he is born. In reality the soul has been entombed in the grave of the physical frame, so it is more appropriate to say that it has died. When it comes in contact with the saints and gets initiation, it is attached to Nam and is getting out of the grave of the physical frame. So it is appropriate to say that it is born, or reborn.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

At the moment of initiation we are born, as it were, into the Master’s family. It is sometimes said that we are then already in our real home, Sach Khand; it is just that we have no consciousness of it. We see everything through a distorting lense, our abnormal construction of events crystallized by our ego over myriads of lives. We tell ourselves that reality is ‘out there’ and that in order to be in touch with what is ‘going on’ we must be out there too. This is the false consciousness of the roving and unhappy mind, which mistakes pleasure for joy. Like fishes in a net, the more we struggle and seek diversion from the pain of existence, the more enmeshed we become.

Nothing has the power to overcome the strong negative gravitational pull of mind and matter except the greatest power of all, Shabd, and our Master who is Shabd incarnate. The relationship between our soul, the Master, the Lord and the Shabd is explained with dazzling clarity by the Great Master in _Spiritual Gems_:

> The audible life stream which we call Shabd is the everlasting form of the Lord and is always within every one of us. At the eye focus it assumes the Astral Form of the Master and in this physical world it assumes the physical form of the Master. The function of Shabd is to lift the soul up; but it cannot perform this function until the mind and soul concentrate at the focus of the eyes. It is by means of repetition of the five holy names – while keeping the attention between the eyes – that the currents of the soul gradually leave the body and collect behind the eyes. When the concentration is complete and the entire body has become numb, then it is easy for the sound current to pull up the soul.

This is the process of dying while living, completely taking the sting out of physical death, and fulfilling the purpose of the new birth given to us at initiation.

The destruction of the karmas cannot really begin until we collect our consciousness at the eye centre. Therefore we cannot begin to realize our birthright – that we are already in Sach Khand – without following the Master’s instruction to do our meditation regularly and punctually for the prescribed time. Meditation is the only way to clear the results of our good and bad deeds which have the potential to keep us here. Meditation is true repentance.

As our consciousness changes with meditation, everything about us changes too. The whole process is about losing our own identity to become the being we love best, to achieve our proper condition with the soul rightly controlling the mind and senses. This new birth into our spiritual heritage is a far cry from the unhappy squalling creature arriving in this world upside down and bewildered. If we attend faithfully to our meditation, with repetition and contemplation as our bricks and mortar, we will catch the sound current and do our bit in the reconstruction of our true selves:

> The attention will then be uninfluenced by worldly happenings, because it has detached itself from the material world, and will then be able to catch the current without interruption.… There are no failures in Sant Mat. Sooner or later, the soul that is keeping its contact with the sound current will reach its home. When the way to the home is known, and one keeps the way, where is the room for doubt that home will be reached?
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

## He Wishes for the Cloths of Heaven

> Had I the heavens’ embroidered cloths, Enwrought with golden and silver light, The blue and the dim and the dark cloths Of night and light and the half-light,
> I would spread the cloths under your feet: But I, being poor, have only my dreams;
> I have spread my dreams under your feet; Tread softly because you tread on my dreams.
> <sub>W. B. Yeats</sub>

This poem expresses the human desire to give, to share the wonders of this creation. The poet wonders what he actually possesses of it that he can give. His answer is that all he possesses are his own dreams – his perceptions, ideas, beliefs and hopes. Therefore he gives of these, hoping that they will be received kindly.

The Masters tell us not to invest our dreams in this world. They question whether it is possible for us to invest our love and hope in this world without getting hurt. When focused below the eye centre, we live in the realm of change, loss and eventual decay. If we spread our dreams in the world we are setting ourselves up for disappointment.

The Masters advise us to concentrate our attention in and above the eye centre. Here we can attain eternal satisfaction. If we spread our dreams under our inner Master’s feet, he gradually replaces them with prospects of an achievable, blissful reality.

We are not poor. We are rich. We have simran, dhyan and bhajan. These are the heavens’ embroidered cloths, “enwrought with golden and silver light.” We can spread these cloths under Baba Ji’s feet, every day, in meditation.

**The Interior Castle**

Let us imagine our soul as a castle, one made out of a single diamond or translucent crystal, and there are many rooms in this castle.… Think carefully over this and realize that the soul of a good person is nothing less than paradise, in which, as God tells us himself, he finds delight. Imagine how beautiful that dwelling must be to delight a King so mighty, so wise, so pure and abounding in goodness.

I can find nothing whatever to compare in beauty with the human soul in its vast capacity. No matter how powerful our intellect may be, we can no more comprehend this than we can comprehend God Himself; for according to his own word, he made us in his image and likeness …

The human soul is a creature, of course, and there is therefore as much difference between it and God as between creature and Creator, but the fact that His Majesty says it is made in his own image means that we can hardly form any idea of its great dignity and beauty.… This castle, as I have said, is made up of many rooms; some above, some below and others at either side; and in the midst of them is that chamber which is the inmost heart of the castle where secret intimacies are exchanged between God and the soul.
> <sub>Saint Teresa, _The Wisdom of Saint Teresa of Avila,_ compiled by Ruth Burrows</sub>

## Try to Understand

Do not unnecessarily be led away by the mind. Sant Mat does not tell of any new path, nor does it consist of rituals and ceremonies. It merely points out the way that lies within every human being to return to the Lord, and this way or path has been made by the Lord himself.

It is not an established religion that we can discard one day and follow another time. Try to understand what Sant Mat is and the deep significance that lies at its foundation.

The mind is the only opponent we have to control, and it is not a question of days or even of years. “It takes a lifetime to be able to hold the Beloved in one’s arms,” says a Sufi mystic. Just think for how long the mind has been enjoying the pleasures of the senses in this world – ever since creation. And you can see for yourself how long it will take and what effort will be required to change the habit of the mind.

Sant Mat does not interfere with the life that we are leading in the material world; that is being governed by our destiny. This path is meant only for God-realization. How can we postpone the time for meditation for the future when it is so uncertain and over which we have absolutely no control. Man proposes, but God disposes. Every breath that we take without thinking of the Lord is time wasted. Time is short and so much has to be done. Please do not follow the voice of the mind, which is always ready to take us away from the path.

Give Sant Mat a trial and give all the time you can to meditation, without expecting any visible signs of progress. That is not in our hands, but in the hands of a higher power. Our duty is to remain at the door of the Lord, like a beggar, and pray for his mercy and grace. I hope you will not listen to what your mind has to say, but will remain on the diet and will continue giving whatever time you can to your meditation every day with faith and devotion.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

> Nature loves leisure and bodily rest, but grace cannot be unoccupied, but gladly embraces toil.
> <sub>Thomas a Kempis, _The Imitation of Christ_</sub>

## Touched by Magic

If satsangis were asked to write their autobiography, we might find that, except for some idiosyncratic differences, we all share a pattern to our lives. After all, we found out about the path, we were initiated and here we are trying to put the teachings into practice.

The main purpose of saints incarnating on this earth is to make us aware that this is not our true home. We are so entangled in the cycle of transmigration that we think that what we see is the reality, that it is the truth. Yet all that we see with the physical eyes is subject to change. If something is subject to change then it is not the truth, because one of truth’s attributes is that it is unchangeable.

Maharaj Sawan Singh has used the example of a lion cub that starts playing with sheep. His constant association with sheep makes him think he is one of them and he forgets that he is a cub with the potential to be a lion, the king of the jungle. There comes a moment of realization when he understands he is a lion, not a sheep. It is the same for us. When we start realizing the illusory nature of the world, we look for something eternal, an everlasting relationship. That is when we get attracted to the spiritual path of the saints. Before this awareness we just think we’re common human beings. First we are born, then as we grow up we study, get jobs, get married, have children and the cycle continues. Bombarded by these outward events, it’s too easy to regard our spiritual inclination as a one-off feeling with no real substance.

Rather like a spiritual seeker, Harry Potter, the fictional character created by J.K.Rowling, thought he was an ordinary human being. He lived with his aunty, uncle and cousin. But at the age of eleven he discovered his parents’ true identity and that he too was a wizard by inheritance. That is similar to what happens to us. We realize our true kinship with a spiritual Father – whether we call him God or Creator or Lord. And the amazing truth is that he can be found within us at that perfect level of consciousness that exists beyond the physical and mental worlds. Soami Ji, reminding us of this reality, writes in one of his poems, “Let us turn homewards, friend – why linger in this alien land?”

**Going Homewards**
Once we’ve realized that we’re spiritual beings, we have to start going homewards. How are we going to do that? In _Die to Live_ Maharaj Charan Singh has explained this when he says:

> The Creator has determined how we are to go back to him, and we cannot take any short cut or any other route. He has ordained that we must seek a perfect Master, and be initiated by him while both the Master and the disciple are living.
> Then through meditation we must please the Master, we must eliminate our ego, and merge with the Father, become one with the Creator.

We’re lucky to be on this path, to have found a perfect living Master and to be initiated. However, that is just the start. At the time the fictional Harry finds out that his parents are from a magical world, he also gains admission to the school of magic and wizardry. Like Harry, once we’ve gained admission to Sant Mat’s university of the spirit, our incredible journey begins. Baba Ji has said that initiation is merely the expression of the desire to obtain salvation. That is, initiation is only the beginning; once we’re initiated we cannot remain static and wait for things to happen to us. We have to be proactive and put in our level best to tread this path of God-realization. When Harry starts attending his classes at school, he starts studying, doing homework and sitting for exams. His adventures depict him putting into action what he learns. He studies, but he is not obsessed with gaining endless knowledge; instead he puts into action the simple concepts he has learned and wins his battles. Mystics, too, explain the limitation of intellect and stress the importance of practice to convert concepts into understanding. In support of this, Maharaj Sawan Singh says in _Spiritual Gems_:

> The point is that intellectually, man thinks and argues only up to a certain stage; but it is only when he goes in that he has perfect knowledge.

So through our meditation we have to go within to discover our true potential.

**Simran – Importance of the Five Holy Words**
Once we’re initiated we’re given the gift of meditation. What is meditation and what does it consist of? At the time of initiation we’re given five holy names which we have to repeat. We sit in a quiet place each day and practise repetition whilst focusing our attention into the darkness we see in our forehead when we close our eyes. This is known as simran. After dedicating about three quarters of the time to this practice, we spend the remaining time in bhajan, which is listening to the Shabd, the audible life stream. The Shabd can be heard in every human being once the mind is brought under control and a state of concentration achieved. Until then we try to listen.

The five holy names have been empowered by the association they have with the living Master who has given them to us. We have to use these five words with great care, as if we were handling five precious jewels. These names have the power to elevate us, to get us out of this cycle of life and death. It is only the practice of simran which is in our hands, so our effort has to be put into this. Everything else in our spiritual progress is the result of simran.

In the world of J. K. Rowling’s books, everything is made possible by reciting some words. There are different sets of words known as spells which are used to bring about different things. Numerous spells exist for almost everything. One of the most powerful and dangerous spells has the power to extinguish life. Our simran’s ultimate purpose is to extinguish our ego so that we can unite with the divine. Our simran defeats the negative tendencies in us and gives life to the positive. Along the way, simran has the positive effect of helping us to calm down, and aiding us in coping with our circumstances. More powerfully than any spell, it gradually eradicates the obstacles in our way to God-realization.

**Final Destination – Through Death to Life**
Through our daily meditation we’re preparing for death and making a start on our true life. For that is what meditation is; as Maharaj Charan Singh says in _Die to Live_, “Meditation is a daily rehearsal to die.”

Death often is viewed in a negative way. Yet because we’re on this path, we should actually prepare for it because that is when the real journey begins. At one point in the Harry Potter stories, Harry’s headmaster comments, “To a well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure._”_ So death is only scary for those who are not prepared. It causes anxiety for those who do not have a living Master because they do not know what to expect. We are always scared of the unknown. Our meditation is that practice in which we can experience dying while still being alive. Then, at the time of death we will not be experiencing an unknown feeling. Kabir says:

> If one dies while living For him death is sweet.
> His rank and honour are dead, So too is his I-ness.
> Those who while living die By merging into the Lord Become immortal, O Kabir.
> <sub>Kabir The Weaver of God’s Name</sub>

It has been said that once we are initiated, our place in Sach Khand is assured. We just have to put in our effort and we’ll get there one day. We know what the effort is – meditation. However, there is something that we can do to ease our journey towards our destination. One of the skills Harry learned was how to disappear from one place and appear in other place. The technique involved in this task was known as the three Ds. The first D was to fix one’s mind firmly on the desired _Destination._ The second D was to summon up one’s _Determination_ to get to there. Finally the last D was to feel that one is going into nothingness, moving with _Deliberation._ We also have to remember our spiritual destination. Secondly we have to arm ourselves with the solid determination that we’re going to get there. Lastly, we have to let go, surrender to the Lord’s will and simply put in our effort with deliberation. By our limited effort and his tremendous grace, we will disappear from this world and appear in our true home at last.

## The Benefits of Taking Refuge

The Mahabharat has a story about a goat. She was a sick, feeble creature who had strayed from her home and got lost in a vast, seemingly endless forest. She had no choice but to try to fend for herself, finding what she could to eat when she wasn’t looking over her shoulder in terror of the many dangers in the forest.

The tiger, the king of the Indian forest, took pity on the little goat and decided to free her from this dreadful destiny. He told the elephants to take her in their care. Whenever they went to drink water, she would ride on one of their backs on the way to the river and return in the same way when her thirst was satisfied. In this way she soon became fit and well and settled happily into the life of the forest, looked after always by the elephants.

Such is the benefit of taking refuge. By taking refuge with the Saints, even the humble human can become a Saint.

<sub><sub>_Tales of the Mystic East_</sub></sub>

• • •

When the good karmas (actions) have secured for the seeker the benefit of contacting a Master, he should surrender himself to the Master and follow his instructions. Through surrender the satsangi throws the burden of his karmas on the Master. Then through meditation the mind is subdued, goes beyond the region of Kal and Maya, and the satsangi develops love.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Divine Light_</sub>

## Loneliness

Sometimes the feeling of loneliness comes with such intensity that even amongst family and friends we cannot escape it, and we seek a remedy by throwing ourselves ever more deeply into the social whirl. Still the feeling persists and, not knowing its real cause, we desperately seek out further relationships. One of our basic misunderstandings is the notion that family and friends, our life companions, are a source of happiness. We find it hard to accept when the Masters explain that, in reality, we do not even have one real friend in the whole world.

However, the lessons of life dawn on us slowly, and we learn the hard way when cherished relationships go sour, and the objects of the world that we chased and hankered after lose their lustre.

The mystics tell us that this feeling of loneliness is God-sent and natural. We are of divine origin and our soul is a part of the Lord. Peace and happiness can only be found when the part merges in its source. Just as the mind comes to experience peace when it merges itself in the universal mind, in the same way the soul finds ultimate liberation and perfect happiness in the lap of its heavenly Father.

Our existence away from our source, the Lord, is the root cause of all unhappiness. When this realization dawns on us, it is an auspicious occasion in our life. As Maharaj Charan Singh has written in _Divine Light_:

> This feeling is to be welcomed, and if the situation is understood correctly, a suitable remedy can be found. If a person takes advantage of these moments (which come rarely in one’s life), studies the situation rightly and puts his soul on the way of devotion to God, he eventually reaches his goal and obtains his object in life for all eternity.

We are a combination of body, mind and soul and it is unfortunate that our modern physical sciences have focused entirely on making our bodily life comfortable. The consequence of neglecting the welfare of the mind and the soul is the primary cause of constant crisis in our life. Thankfully, the Lord has kept open an avenue of spirituality through which our soul can travel back to its source. This is the timeless and exact science of the soul. All perfect spiritual Masters, past or present, have taught this method in which daily meditation under the instructions of a living Master gradually collects the scattered mind and brings it into contact with the Shabd.

In _Divine Light_, Maharaj Charan Singh gives advice that is timeless and an answer to our prayers:

> Please take advantage of this blessed feeling [of loneliness] and turn your mind to him who never leaves us. All true happiness, peace and satisfaction proceed from devotion to God alone.

And in _Quest for Light_ he writes:

> This constant feeling of loneliness and missing something is in reality the hidden unquenched thirst and craving of the soul for its Lord. It will always persist as long as the soul does not return to its ancient original home and meet its Lord. Only then will it get true contentment and eternal peace. This feeling has been purposely put in the heart of man. If this natural inclination of the soul towards its Lord had not been there, then perhaps none would have turned to the Creator for solace and peace.

## Our Soldiers Need Better Preparation for Life after Death

The title of this article comes from a speech about leadership made in 2007 by General Sir Richard Dannatt, then head of the British Army. Death is not the end, and soldiers going into war should receive better spiritual support, he proposed. Good leadership should encourage awareness of the spiritual dimension of life and the reality of life after death.

Sir Richard’s view on our need for spirituality is in accord with that of the mystics; moreover saints inform us that life itself on this plane is a war. They explain that life beyond death is the reality and that this life is the illusion.

**The War of Life**
The saints clearly present the truth that we live in a sphere of karma, of suffering. Rumi explains:

> When you consider it, this world is in continuous war, atom with atom, like faith against infidelity.
> One atom flies to the left, another to the right, one atom up, another down, seeking each other: In this tendency, behold a war manifest.

> This manifest war is the result of a hidden war: Know that this discord springs from that.… War in nature, war in deeds, war in words – there is a terrible war between all the parts.
> The world is maintained by means of this war: look at the elements and you will understand it.
> The four elements are four sturdy pillars by which the roof of the present world is held in place. Yet each pillar is a destroyer of the other: the pillar of water is a destroyer of fire, and so on.
> <sub>Rumi, as quoted in _A Treasury of Mystic Terms_</sub>

Rumi explains the whole world is in a state of warfare, starting with polaric repulsion at the atomic level. He says that open conflict between religious groups, conflicts in nature and in our individual lives are simply a reflection of the underlying antagonism within matter.

He explains that this state of conflict is obvious considering that this world is made of four physical elements: earth, water, fire and air. Each element is capable of attacking the other, for instance fire is extinguished by water and water is evaporated by air.

Nature is at war with itself in that all the life-forms on our planet are warlike: their first instinct is survival – to get food and shelter. Getting their food means killing another species whilst they will be killed for food in their turn. This state of nature, as well as the terrible wars between nations and all the horrible suffering involved, is an outward manifestation of inner turmoil. Rumi’s poignant verse infers that peace is beyond human ability. But in the last verse of his commentary he provides the solution:

> Since the essence, the spirit, is beyond these oppositions, its nature is not contrary like this; it is divine …
> When the spirit sets its face towards the divine Beloved, it lays down its baggage and passes into life eternal.

Rumi explains that when the spirit within us starts to make its way homewards to God, all its baggage of body, mind and emotions, with the resulting accumulated karmas, are laid down and discarded. The divine reality within us doesn’t have these attributes of the physical, it is not made of elements that mutually repel, it is pure love, pure Shabd.

**Life**
So what is this life we are enduring? Here are three poets powerfully offering their views:

> Life’s but a walking shadow; a poor player, That struts and frets his hour upon the stage, And then is heard no more: it is a tale
> Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.
> <sub>William Shakespeare, _Macbeth_</sub>

Shakespeare observes that if we look at our life span carefully, we will realize that it’s over before we know it. And when we shuffle off this mortal coil, perhaps we might think people would be sad and miss us dreadfully but, he suggests, think again. Our spouse or children might shed a tear at our passing but what about the wider world? It didn’t even know we existed, let alone care that we are gone.

He says we are just poor actors in a short little play – that is the sum of our lifespan, … _it is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing._ If we analyze these words carefully we will realize how true they are in describing the lot of mankind. All the hectic activity that we hurl ourselves into: the frantic worrying, the plotting, the scheming, in the end are just that – _a tale told by an idiot._

Bob Dylan, in a song called _Idiot Wind_ sings:

> Idiot wind, blowing through the buttons of our coats, Blowing through the letters that we wrote.
> Idiot wind, blowing through the dust upon our shelves, We’re idiots babe,
> It’s a wonder we can even feed ourselves.

Dylan is making a similar point to Shakespeare’s: look at our lifestyle, it is idiotic and self-destructive. We worldly people go frantically through life chasing after the illusion of pleasure through possessions, status, family or sensual enjoyment and then merely burn out; we die and are forgotten. Dylan uses the image of a wind to suggest our karmic environment, encircling us, making us so idiotic that _it’s a wonder we can even feed ourselves._

The next famous quotation looks at our life beyond the physical:

> Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The soul that rises with us, our life’s Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting,
> And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness,
> And not in utter nakedness,
> But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home …
> <sub>William Wordsworth, _Intimations of Immortality_</sub>

Wordsworth explains that when we take birth we forget our divine origin. His inspiring words inform us that our soul is the eternal reality, and though we fall into the deep sleep of this life, our soul remembers and tries to nudge us out of our slumber. The great poets give a hint of the truth but perfect Masters provide the complete truth.

**Death and Life after Death**
So what is the nature of death? Maharaj Charan Singh explains in

_Quest for Light_:

> You ask me why your friend had to die. The answer is very simple. Every one has to leave this world one day. Only death is certain. Nothing else in this world is certain. And death does not take into consideration our age, wisdom, youth, love, wealth, dignity or devotion, nor does it wait for permission from anyone. It does not care whether you love its victim or hate him.
> Such happenings come to us as a warning – to set us thinking as to the transitory nature of our existence here; that we also shall have to leave it one day. We never think seriously about this matter. If we would, we would certainly not forget our meditation as we do.

Maharaj Charan Singh patiently explains that death is the only certain thing about life. We should not be complacent, thinking we have youth and a healthy body, or that our karmas have given us time and money to pamper our body. Death is a fact, so when it takes a son or daughter, spouse or parent, why do we question it? Do we not hear what the Master is saying? Death is the reality and life is the illusion. Hazur Maharaj Ji states that if we could only remember this, there would be no question of ever missing meditation. If we are initiated, meditation comes first in our lives and everything else can wait.

So we can understand that it is not just soldiers who need better preparation for life after death: we do too.
**Preparation for Life and Death**
How can we humans best prepare for life after death? As Hazur Maharaj Ji often used to say, we need to take a positive approach.

Most of us have had direct contact with Maharaj Charan Singh or Baba Gurinder Singh and have heard them seemingly endlessly, patiently, lovingly suggest that it is living according to the four principles of Sant Mat that can both help us to live life to the full and prepare us to die. When a soul is brought into the orbit and influence of the saints, into their aura of protection, she is encouraged to change the self-destructive behaviour in which she is trapped like a fly in a web into positive, soul-supporting behaviour through adopting these four principles.

A human can be awe-struck and freeze at the cosmic vastness of this undertaking: How can a wretch like me go from puny human to being one with God? But Baba Ji reassures us that every smallest step makes a difference.

The Sant Mat way of life takes us from being part of the war-zone to being part of a place where eternal peace reigns. The four principles of vegetarianism, avoidance of mind-altering intoxicants, moral living and daily meditation are truly a fortress. And the Master who initiated us is our general, sent by the Creator on a mission to save souls and lead them out of this battle-torn wilderness. When we have such love, grace and protection all around us, how can we fail?
_Our soldiers need better preparation for life after death,_proposed a very enlightened military commander. The Master concurs – all souls are his little soldiers.

## Feeling Funny

<sub>1. 2. 3.</sub>

<sub>4. 5. 6.</sub>

<sub>7. 8. 9.</sub>

## Mind Out!

The cosmos, so the sages say, has been created by the One Being as an emanation of himself. It has been projected out of and within himself, as successive worlds or levels of creation, as a hierarchy of being.

According to some, in the course of this emanative process, mind first appears high up in this hierarchy as the primal architect of the duality that leads to the multiplicity in which we now find ourselves. At that high level in creation, we can call it the universal mind. And from that point onwards, every little being as it descends further into the creation has – so to speak – a little bit of this greater mind attached, through which it views creation.

Practically all traditions say that there are a host of heavens or worlds (“many mansions”, “all the worlds”) in the creation, of ever-increasing subtlety. These realms are levels or stages in the hierarchy of creation. And as the little beings descend, they are equipped with minds (and bodies) suitable for functioning in those realms. It’s an automatic process. And right down at the bottom of this hierarchy, there’s our familiar, physical world.

We would certainly agree that where we find ourselves right now, we have a mind and body. No denying that. But in the process of communicating with the physical world, we have become so increasingly identified first with our mind, and then with our body, that we have forgotten our innermost essence, our innermost secret. We have forgotten that we are all little beings dwelling in his big Being. Some folk have called this forgetfulness, the Fall. First, we were all cosy, living in the blissful, eternal garden of the One Being. Then we got involved with mind and duality, and now look at us! No wonder they cast the mind as a deceiving serpent.

The human mind, being a part of the greater mind from which all this duality and activity originates, is attracted by multiplicity and diversity. This, however, makes it very unhappy, and to fill the vacuum of its own unhappiness, it seeks further diversity. It tries to find happiness in all the changing things around it – pleasures, possessions, and attractions of every conceivable kind. Of course, things that change can’t bring any lasting happiness, and so the mind gets even more frustrated, restless and miserable.

In this manner, entangled in its own illusions, the mind further develops its sense of a separate identity, which it believes to be real.

It identifies completely with its own thoughts, feelings, and bodily experiences. It even starts to think that it is nothing but the body itself. Thus, the apparent isolation of the little beings from the one big Being is complete. And in their distress, the little beings create mayhem and suffer even more as a consequence. And that is what we call human existence.

<sub>John Davidson, _One Being One_</sub>

• • •

> As I have often repeated, the soul and the mind are knotted together in the human body and it is only when the mind is controlled by the soul that the mind can return to its source, which is the second spiritual stage. From that point onward the soul is free to return to its own original home. But as long as the mind is dominated by the senses, it does not realize that the world is not its home and keeps the soul bound here along with it.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

## Something to Think About
**A Pure Heart**

Once your heart becomes pure and clear, it will become a mirror on which pictures will appear from beyond the realm of earth and water. Not only will such pictures appear, but also the image of the one who painted them.

<sub>Rumi, _Rumi in a Nutshell,_ Robert van de Wever</sub>

• • •

I am glad to know that you do not have much trouble with meditation and you get wonderful results and lovely experiences every time you sit for meditation. This shows the purity of your heart and very great grace of the Lord. Such a soul is sure to make very great and early spiritual progress.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

• • •

Your experiences of being lifted up into the beautiful light at the time of your operation are signs of the purity of your heart and your great love for the Lord. During anaesthesia our attention is automatically withdrawn from our five senses and is concentrated inside. Please try to bring about this condition by your meditation, now that the Lord has given you just a glimpse of what light and love is placed within you.

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Quest for Light_</sub>

<sub>38 Spiritual Link</sub>

## Forgiveness

Forgiveness is fundamental for spiritual growth. Without it there could be no progress and no attainable goal. Through the teachings of the saints we know that we have been incarcerated in this creation, reincarnating life after life into different forms and that all these forms are on the road to death as soon as they are born.

We are currently trapped in the human form, which will last for a short while until we die and the soul moves on. In this continuous process, because we act and then react to the situations we find ourselves in, we create a mass of karma, which is the balance sheet of our debts and credits at any time. Life after life we engineer our future through the actions we take in the present, and in this way are wholly responsible for our destiny – no one else is to blame. Unfortunately, our balance sheets hold a large mass of creditors and we will have to give account to them all in some way. Alone, we are destitute and in irredeemable debt, and it is here that forgiveness plays its part.

Maharaj Sawan Singh used to say that the law of karma is universally applicable, while forgiveness is the speciality of the saints.

That statement sheds the most revealing light on God’s plan for human redemption. If there were no forgiveness, or in other words, no divine intervention capable of releasing us from our debts, then there would be no possibility of the soul finding its way back to the Creator from whom it came so long ago. The well-known saying “To err is human, to forgive is divine”, also reveals the unique link between the soul erring or turning away from the Creator and the Creator providing a way to redemption through divine forgiveness. When we talk about the love of the Master or the love of the Lord, the very fact that we can do so and are now in contact with our home is a prime demonstration of that forgiveness.

So forgiveness is the essence of our relationship with the Lord and our Master, and whilst we are unable to experience the immensity of true divine love at this stage, we can see loving compassion at work in the living Master – in everything he says and does. The Master accepts us as his responsibility, complete with all our karmas and wayward characteristics. In essence, we were forgiven when the Master accepted us in the first place. We should now follow the example of his love and express our gratitude to him through our daily actions.

If we wish to experience the full effect of the love and forgiveness of the Creator, we must invoke that forgiveness, when initiated, by attending to our meditation – two and a half hours every day, without fail. The reason for the meditation is first to keep the mind from wandering out into the creation by use of the repetition of the five holy names, or simran. By this means, we focus our whole attention at the eye centre and collect it there. In time, this will allow the concentrated mind to catch the sound current, the Shabd within. The second part of the meditation period is listening for that sound.

When discussing prayer, the Masters say that meditation is automatically a prayer for forgiveness and is wholly acceptable to the Lord. Our meditation has the practical effect of making us receptive to the forgiveness of the Lord and is the way that he himself has established for us to seek forgiveness, as opposed to the mere repetition of words. Meditation is the daily active proof that we are serious about achieving our goal and that we wish to please the Master. It demonstrates our true feeling in a much better way than chasing after the physical Master and all the other outward things that can so easily become rituals. There is no need to heap praise on the Master and beseech him to save us. Why not demonstrate to him that we are sincere by attending to our meditation in private as he asks us to do?

The physical Master is the signpost to the true Master within, the Shabd. If we do not digest this fact and act accordingly, then we are not helping the Master in his work. His work is to see us home, and for that to happen, the soul’s load of karmas must be eradicated through contact, at a higher level, with the Shabd. No wonder the Master urges us to attend to meditation – we must reach that point where the Shabd can wash us clean. We must allow ourselves to be fully forgiven.

As we continue on the path, year after year, attending to all our duties, so our conduct in the world should change to reflect our progress. We will become more genuinely loving, more contented, more placid, more responsible, more forgiving to others. We can accelerate this process by understanding and practising some of these attributes so that they start to become part of our nature.

Practising forgiveness by attending to small issues with compassion and understanding will encourage this characteristic to grow in us to the level where we feel compassion for the condition of all souls caught in this trap of illusion. All are struggling souls like us, all seeking happiness and peace – most looking in the wrong direction and seeking it in the creation, when all the time it is within. What greater tragedy, what greater cause of sorrow and misunderstanding can there be? Knowing this, we can hardly criticize others – but we still do, and are diminished by doing so. Why are we so lacking in compassion for others and why do we fail in our duty to render loving help when we have received so much kindness from the Master? He has accepted us and loves us even though we are besmirched with all our negative features. This should prompt us to find just an iota of the love we have received and dispense it to others by way of understanding, compassion and practical help.

So forgiveness and compassion go hand in hand and are a divine blessing to all. As these characteristics develop in us so we will become more detached and merciful.

“The person of a forgiving nature is calm, humble, patient and forbearing,” explains Maharaj Sawan Singh in _Philosophy of the Masters Vol. III_. These characteristics are beloved of the Master, so we can quietly try to practise them. There, within the inner sanctum of our hearts, the Master will see our sincere efforts and the desire to change, and he will be pleased.

_This is the highest knowledge and the most useful lesson – to have true understanding and small opinion of oneself. To hold no high opinion of oneself, and always to judge well and highly of others, is great wisdom and high perfection. If you should see another openly do wrong, or commit some grievous sins, you should not reckon yourself better than he, because you do not know how long you may be able to continue in integrity. We are all frail, but you must not count anyone more frail than yourself._
> <sub>Thomas a Kempis, _The Imitation of Christ_</sub>

## Occupy the Crease

Cricket, glorious cricket! Those of us who love this intriguing old game (the Laws were written in 1788) find it totally absorbing and seriously addictive to watch or play. But have we ever thought that cricket, with all its minute detail, can also be a highly revealing metaphor for a satsangi’s life on the path? Looking at the game this way might change not only how we look at cricket but how we, as satsangis, play this innings of our life.

Let’s play our life like a true batsman: let us stay in to win the game by patiently building a long, structured innings. The batting crease, the space in front of the wicket, is the batsman’s ground, his personal space, and the first thing he must do is to ‘take guard’ here. He scrapes a line to mark the optimum position from which to defend his wicket. We, as satsangis, have to do the same. For us the crease is our chosen place for meditation. If we keep to the same time and place for meditation, it is an anchor in our life, our place of safety. We too have to take guard to prepare for the monumental struggle with the mind.

Just as the batsman must face the bowler’s attack, the satsangi has to confront the mind. The sole aim of the bowler is to tempt the batsman into making a mistake and so take his wicket, and the sole aim of the batsman is to protect his wicket, just as the satsangi has to protect his soul from the devious weapons of the mind.

In order to do this the batsman (satsangi) needs to exhibit intense concentration, discrimination, resilience and courage in the face of attack. To develop these many qualities he needs to have had years (in our case it may be many lifetimes) of repetitive practice with the bat. For the bat, read “meditation”. The bat is the only single thing that will ensure protection of his wicket, but only if he uses it with the skilful technique taught by his coach.

So, as opening batsman we will face the bowler with a brave heart and the intention to ‘carry our bat’ (not get bowled out) to the close, make the opposition follow-on and win by an innings so that we will not have to bat again. In other words, do our meditation and reach Sach Khand in this life. But as we can all testify, this is not easy. Being initiated, or being a chosen opening batsman, is not for the faint-hearted. Like an innings, our life as a satsangi becomes a long, personal battle of constant vigilance toward the cunning of the mind.

**The Bowler is Relentless**
The bowler (mind), to achieve his aim, is ruthless and passionate in his attack and he bombards the batsman relentlessly with pace, bounce and swing, keeping him under constant pressure to force an error. He charges in, hurtling and leaping towards him and explosively releases the ball (the senses) towards him. If the batsman has not done his practice with the bat (his meditation), there is no hope for him in the face of this onslaught. The bowler can also change his attack to one which is so full of deceit and guile that the batsman has to use all his resources to withstand it. The bowler will sometimes just walk menacingly towards the batsman and pitch the ball on the biggest cracks and lumps so that it spits up at the batsman, alarming him.

And, always sensing vulnerability, he will deliberately tempt him further and further out of his crease so that eventually the batsman will dance down the pitch in a flamboyant and frustrated attempt to hit the ball and go too far and get stumped – he has fatally abandoned his only refuge, the crease, losing his wicket and being dismissed from the scene of play. (In our analogy, he will have to come back for another life to do more practice to control his ego.)

As if all this is not difficult enough for us to deal with, the bowler also has numerous allies in the field to help him eject the batsman from the crease. These are his dedicated and vigilant friends all around the arena – the fielders. (For the satsangi, the fielders represent friends and relations in the world.) And the bowler’s best allies, whom he places closest to the batsman – the wicket keeper and the slips – are for the satsangi, his most unremitting karmic attachments, his nearest and dearest, his spouse and his children. If the batsman doesn’t ‘find the gaps’ (time for spiritual practice every day), they can insidiously rob him of his spiritual wealth because of their emotional needs and the time they demand. They are lined up waiting for the batsman to be drawn into a fatal mistake (too much attachment). Even a little indulgence in this, a tentative nibble at a wide ball, can result in disastrous consequences. _Desires and attachments in this world, small or large, will ensure rebirth here more than anything else._

**A Satsangi’s Only Friend**
So with all this going on around him, the batsman satsangi can be forgiven if he feels isolated and threatened in this arena of life. But he should not despair! He has even more powerful weapons than the bowler (mind) does, if only he can recognize and accept the help that is there for him. Firstly, he has been given protection against the bowler’s attack with his pads, gloves and helmet. These are the simran we have been given, which is the antidote to the onslaught of the mind. If we wear these – that is, if we practise simran at every opportunity – we will be protected and not feel the blows.

Secondly and most important for the batsman is that he has to remember that he too has a powerful and vigilant ally – the non-striker batsman, who is his only friend on the field. This, for the satsangi, is of course the Master. He always lovingly guides and encourages the batsman. He will constantly come towards him and touch gloves, urging him to continue to occupy the crease, to use his bat (meditation) effectively, and reassure him that he is his friend and that they are in the battle together. However, in order to score runs, a trusting partnership must be forged between them and they must stay in together until they have won. Similarly, a satsangi must regard his Master as his only friend in the world, and develop an enduring partnership with him until they win together, and the Master takes the batsman to his real home in Sach Khand.

So, if the batsman, through steely concentration (total faith in his Master) produces fine shots with a straight bat (meditation every day), if he keeps his game simple and makes a big hundred not out, the whole arena will rise to their feet and give him a deafening ovation (total spiritual bliss). His partner will rush to embrace him and he will then raise his bat (meditation triumphant), kiss his helmet (remember simran at all times), grab a stump (ensuring no rebirth on this plane) and together they will run in ecstasy towards his coach (Sat Purush). His coach, who has seemed to be in the background but, in fact, has been watching the scene of play intently, is well pleased. He will greet the batsman with euphoric joy and welcome him in to the pavilion (Sach Khand), his true home.

So always remember you are in it to win it. And when the final stumps are drawn, would we not want to be able to say that we always occupied the crease, and kept a still head and a straight bat under pressure? And, most of all see the greatest batsman of all, our beloved Master, smile and hear from him the words which every batsman wants to hear at close of play – WELL PLAYED!

## The One Thing

There is one thing in this world which you must never forget to do. If you forget everything else and not this, there’s nothing to worry about, but if you remember everything else and forget this, then you will have done nothing in your life.

It’s as if a king has sent you to some country to do a task, and you perform a hundred other services, but not the one he sent you to do. So human beings come to this world to do _particular work._ If you don’t do it, it’s as though a knife of the finest tempering were nailed into a wall to hang things on.

You say, “But look, I’m using the dagger. It’s not lying idle.”

Do you hear how ludicrous that sounds? For a penny an iron nail could be bought to serve for that. You say, “But I spend my energies on lofty enterprises. I study philosophy and logic and astronomy and medicine and all the rest.” But consider why you do those things. They are all branches of yourself.

Remember the deep root of your being, the presence of your lord.

Give your life to the one who already owns your breath and your moments. If you don’t, you will be exactly like the man who takes a precious dagger and hammers it into his kitchen wall for a peg. You’ll be foolishly ignoring your purpose.

<sub>Rumi, as rendered by Moyne and Barks in _Say I Am You_</sub>

## Book Review

**_A Short and Easy Method of Prayer_**

Translated from the French of Madame J.M.B. de la Mothe Guyon, by Thomas Digby Brooke

By Jeanne Marie Bouvier de La Motte Guyon. Publisher: Andover, UK: Gale ECCO, 2010.

ISBN: 9781171126355. Also available free online.

Madame Guyon (also called Jeanne-Marie Bouvier) was a French mystic who lived from 1648 to 1717. She is associated with the movement of Quietism, which held that God can be found within through stillness and surrender under the direction of a spiritual guide. Her writings enjoyed great popularity among both Catholics and Protestants of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. During her lifetime, however, Quietism was declared heretical by the Catholic Church, and Madame Guyon herself was imprisoned in the Bastille.

Born into a pious upper-class family, from her youth Guyon felt a profound desire to commune with God and struggled to achieve a state of unceasing prayer and adoration. Facing utter failure, she told “a very religious person, of the order of Saint Francis” about her problems. He was silent a long while, then said: “It is, madame, because you seek without what you have within. Accustom yourself to seek God in your heart, and you will there find Him.”

> Having said these words, he left me. They were to me like the stroke of a dart, which penetrated through my heart. I felt a very deep wound, a wound so delightful that I desired not to be cured ...
> O my Lord, Thou wast in my heart, and demanded only a simple turning of my mind inward, to make me perceive Thy presence. O, Infinite Goodness! How was I running hither and thither to seek Thee ... O Beauty, ancient and new; why have I known Thee so late? Alas! I sought Thee where Thou wert not, and did not seek Thee where thou wert.

For the next eight years she enjoyed the constant and intense feeling of God’s presence. Then she entered a period in which she lost the sense of grace, found no savour in anything spiritual, and was gripped by fear of her own great evil. She endured seven years of this desolation, which she called “mystical death,” before she felt resurrected into a state in which she did not possess God, as she had felt in the first stage, but God possessed her so completely that she became a tool of his will. She did not act, but God acted within her, and she was moved by God to write automatically, without reflection. In this state she began her apostolic work, spreading her method of attaining the inner presence of God, most famously in a small book translated into English in 1876 as _A Short and Easy Method of Prayer._

Guyon begins her book with this message: “We are all called to prayer, as we are all called to salvation. Prayer is nothing but the application of the heart to God, and the internal exercise of love.” She offers twenty-four short chapters, on subjects such as making the soul active by stilling the self, interior silence, aridities to be borne in love, and the prayer of simplicity, quoting frequently from the Bible throughout.

Guyon understands prayer as “recollection,” meaning “inward recollection, by which the soul is turned wholly and altogether inward, to possess a present God.” Again and again, she emphasizes the efficacy of this form of prayer:

> When the soul is in its central tendency, or in other words, is returned through recollection into itself, from that moment, the central attraction becomes a most potent activity, infinitely surpassing in energy every other species. Nothing, indeed, can equal the swiftness of this tendency to the centre; and though an activity, yet it is so noble, so peaceful, so full of tranquility, so natural, and so spontaneous, that it appears to the soul as if it were none at all.

While acknowledging that recollection is difficult in the beginning, Guyon asserts that it becomes “perfectly easy,” partly from habit, and partly from the abundant grace of God, “whose one will towards His creatures is to communicate Himself to them.” She compares the first efforts of gathering the soul inward to the efforts oarsmen must make to move a large sailing vessel from port. But once the soul departs from thinking and outer works and spreads its sails, the oars can be set aside, and all the pilot needs to do is hold the rudder, to

 r_ estrain our heart from wandering from the true course, recalling it gently, and guiding it steadily by the dictates of the Spirit of God, which gradually gains possession of the heart, just as the breeze by degrees fills the sails and impels the vessel._

According to Guyon, this interior course will “advance us by the divine impulsion farther than many reiterated acts of self-exertion. Whoever will try this path will find it the easiest in the world.”

Guyon advises that we should begin interior prayer by reading just a few words of something inspiring, pausing often to “taste and digest it,” trying to keep the mind in the feeling it engenders. We should read not to analyze, but to fix the mind on the presence of God, letting the lively faith of the presence of God in our inmost soul “produce an eager sinking into ourselves, restraining all our senses from wandering abroad.” This extricates us from distractions and draws us toward God within.

Guyon also describes a second degree of prayer, the “prayer of simplicity.” In this state of contemplation, we find ourselves in the presence of God, and we remain there in “respectful silence,” not troubling ourselves to meditate on any particular subject. We should pray with courage, with pure and disinterested love, not for any spiritual delights, but just to please Him. Steadiness is essential: comparing the soul to a canvas and God to a painter, she says that when a canvas is unsteady, the painter cannot produce a correct picture, as it “interrupts the work and defeats the design of this adorable Painter.”

Guyon stresses the need for stillness and silence within, in order to hear God’s voice:

> “The Lord is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Bible, Habakuk, 2:20). The reason why inward silence is so indispensable is, because the Word is essential and eternal.... Hearing is a sense formed to receive sounds, and is rather passive than active, admitting, but not communicating sensation; and if we would hear, we must lend the ear for that purpose. Christ, the eternal Word, who must be communicated to the soul to give it new life, requires the most intense attention to his voice, when He would speak within us ... we must forget ourselves, and all self-interest, and listen and be attentive to God; these two simple actions, or rather passive dispositions, produce the love of that beauty, which He himself communicates.... When, through weakness, we become as it were uncentred, we must immediately turn again inward; and this process we must repeat as often as our distractions recur.

For those facing periods of dryness and lack of faith, Guyon offers reassurance that succour will come. She explains that, if winds should blow foul and stormy seas should be encountered, we must only cast our anchor in trust of God and hope in his goodness, “waiting patiently the calming of the tempest and the return of a favourable gale.” That this waiting could take years or even a lifetime should not discourage us; we should not seek him by an exertion of will, but should wait peacefully “with silence full of veneration.” As she says, “thus only can you demonstrate that it is HIMSELF alone, and his good pleasure, that you seek; and not the selfish delights of your own sensations in loving Him.”

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## He It Is

> He it is, the innermost one, who awakens my being with his deep hidden touches.

> He it is who puts his enchantment upon these eyes and joyfully plays on the chords of my heart in varied cadence of pleasure and pain.

> He it is who weaves the web of this maya in evanescent hues of gold and silver, blue and green, and lets peep out through the folds his feet,
> At whose touch I forget myself.

> Days come and ages pass, and it is ever he who moves my heart in many a name, in many a guise, in many a rapture of joy and sorrow.

<sub>Rabindranath Tagore, _Gitanjali_</sub>

<sub>December 2011 3</sub>

## Practice Makes Perfect
> Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.
> <sub><sub>Bible, Matthew 5:48</sub></sub>

Maharaj Charan Singh used to tell us that if we were perfect we would not be here.

Our spiritual path is a journey from imperfection to perfection. The author of _The Gospel of Jesus_ writes:

> There is human perfection and divine perfection, the one being a reflection of the other.… If it seems to us that the creation has imperfection, then that is only from our point of view.
> If the creation is to continue, it has to be the way it is or all the souls would immediately return to Him. There has to be something to keep souls here – and that something is what we call imperfection. Just as a shadow only exists because of the light, so too does imperfection only exist because of perfection.
> From His point of view, the creation is entirely as He wants it: it is perfectly imperfect.

We have created our own imperfection and we perpetuate it on a daily basis through the choices we make. The world we see and the life we live is our own choice. If we choose not to get up and meditate, we perpetuate our imperfection. If we get up and meditate, we work at developing our own perfection.

It is our conditioned freedom of choice that creates and perpetuates the personality or ego. An artist captures an impression on a canvas which is an expression of something from within himself. The appreciation of a painting is always subjective, as viewers of the canvas can never see the original image in the artist’s mind. All they see is the reflection on the canvas and they cannot always interpret and understand the artist’s depiction.

Our lives are like paintings: every choice we make adds a facet to the picture we create. Our deeply engrained beliefs form the background or watermark on our canvas, and the splashes of colour represent the choices we make. It is these choices that build the personality.

We may think the painting we are creating is near-perfect, but those with whom we interact will quickly find flaws in the image we project of ourselves, because the image of who we think we are is very different from the image they perceive. Like the critics of an artist’s painting, they can never be inside our head. No one can know the level of our pain, our joy or the overpowering paralysis of our fears. Each of us can only interpret from our own level of experience. At best we have no more than a vague understanding of each other.

As we observe the painting, we rarely think of the pure white canvas, the foundation which made it all possible. It is this foundation

-this purity – that is the perfection we seek. This is our true essence and nature: the Shabd. But on our own we don’t know how to contact or experience the Shabd. As with everything in life, we need a teacher to explain the spiritual process to us and to guide us in the right direction. Once we accept the Master’s teachings, it is our responsibility to practise what he teaches us. This will slowly lead us to progress along the inner path leading us from imperfection to perfection. Practice makes perfect – and perfection is our release from this world.

When we are obsessed with the creation, splashing colours over our canvas in the play of the ego, we have forgotten the Lord and are pursuing personal desires and personal enhancement. At this time our attention is focused in the world, which means we have turned away from reality – away from God. Then the individual self, with its narrow and petty vision, becomes stronger.

When we focus on God we move away from the self and move closer to God and divine perfection. If God is the essence of perfection, we must make ourselves worthy of meeting Him.

Therefore our starting point on our spiritual journey must be to develop the human virtues of perfection. Once we have developed human perfection, we have the foundation on which to build divine perfection. This foundation is built by following the four principles unconditionally – without compromise.

We could refer to them as the four perfections because they are the stepping-stones that will lead us to perfection. The first three – the vegetarian diet, abstinence from alcohol and recreational drugs, and living a moral life – create the necessary human virtues in us.

The fourth principle, our meditation practice, develops in us a greater awareness of the Shabd, which leads us to divine perfection. As we become more aware of the Shabd, it helps us persevere with the first three principles.

In _The Gospel of Jesus_, we read that the best and most effective approach in the quest for human perfection is to seek divine perfection through meditation on the Word of God – the Shabd, through which our good human qualities become apparent. It is from a divine and perfect Master that we receive the grace to become perfect too, for as Jesus said, the disciple will become like his Master:

> The disciple is not above his Master:
> But every one that is perfect shall be as his Master.
> <sub>Bible, Luke 6:40</sub>

Some of us do our meditation as requested by the Master – that is, we sit each and every day for the required two and a half hours without fail. Some of us sincerely try to meditate but find it an ongoing battle, while others are hopelessly casual in their approach to their meditation. Still others simply quit when the going gets tough. We need to keep reminding ourselves that the Master’s teachings take hold and work their magic in a very subtle way and that we must have patience. If we eat ice cream every day for a month, it becomes a habit. The taste buds crave the ice cream. If we do our practice every day as we should, the mind will eventually crave the practice.

The only thing that will give us the inner strength we need to break our old habits and the powerful hold the senses have over us is to attach ourselves to the Shabd, which we do through our regular practice of meditation. Meditation inspires us – it makes us realize that we can let go of worldliness. It is this letting go that sets us free to pursue perfection.

When we are able to let go of the patterns on our canvas and the obsessions we have with improving our picture, we will come to realize how unimportant they are, and this will be a sign that our practice is reaping rewards. And although purity and perfection may still be a long way away, we are slowly disentangling ourselves from the world as we learn to surrender more completely to the Master’s instructions

-
to his will.

Surrender in any form is never easy and to surrender our will to the will of the Master is extremely difficult. The Masters tell us it can only be done by attaching ourselves to Shabd. It is only through the power of Shabd that we can slowly remove all the impressions imprinted on our mental body and uncover the pristine being within

-
just as we would slowly and carefully remove the colours left by the strokes and swirls of the artist’s brush to reveal the pure white canvas underneath it all. We are told that the final goal is so great and sublime that we should not allow anything to get in the way of achieving it.

It will not benefit us to simply pay lip-service to the path. We have to practise, otherwise we are simply wasting a wonderful opportunity to reach both human and divine perfection. Meditation is our journey to perfection under the guidance of a perfect Master.

Again we read in _The Gospel of Jesus_ that the tasteless water of an imperfect and worldly human being is turned into the sweet wine of perfection through the intermediary of the Truth, the Word of God. With such a promise, where should our effort be – in the gratification of the ego or the pursuit of perfection? We should be consistent, sincere and intense in our practice, and should not allow our desire for perfection to weaken. We also read this in _The Gospel of Jesus_:

> The rendezvous with this beautiful, radiant and spiritual form of their Master is the first goal to which the devotees of the universal mystic path aspire. The only obstacles to experiencing it are those that lie within the mind. For only a pure and perfect soul can come before the radiance of one who is purity and perfection personified.

## Appreciate What You Have

The owner of a small business, a friend of the poet Olavo Bilac, met him on the street and asked him: “Mr Bilac, I need to sell my small farm, the one you know so well. Could you please write an announcement for me for the newspaper?”

Bilac wrote:

> FOR SALE: A beautiful property where birds sing at dawn in extensive woodland bisected by the brilliant and sparkling waters of a large stream. The house is bathed by the rising sun. It offers tranquil shade in the evenings on the verandah.

Some time later the poet met his friend and asked whether he had sold the property, to which he replied: “I’ve changed my mind. When I read what you had written, I realized the treasure that was mine.”

In reality we possess nothing, as all things belong to the Lord, but on this plane during this illusion we exist in, for this lifetime, there are certain possessions that we regard as belonging to us. The number and quality of these possessions was determined by our fate karmas for this lifetime. Every single possession should be valued and regarded as being in our trust for the Lord. It is immaterial whether these possessions are extensive or few – as satsangis we know that we receive exactly what is in our destiny; no more, no less. It is totally idiotic to feel proud because we have much, or to feel deprived because we have little. In fact, if we look at things objectively, we actually need very little to fulfil our daily needs. The rest is just trimmings and frills, and unfortunately Kal often uses them to boost our ego.

But something else was written into this life’s destiny. We received something of such immense value that it cannot be comprehended or fully realized by our puny human minds. We received initiation from a perfect Master. We have the astral form of a perfect Satguru awaiting us at the eye focus. This is not a fairytale; it is a fact stressed by the Master over and over. All we need to do is meditate regularly and punctually, with loving devotion and concentration at the eye centre for the daily required time.

Bilac’s friend had to read the description of his property before he realized the treasure that was his. We have so many books, where again and again we can read descriptions of the treasure that is ours.

Let us take this to heart. Let us constantly be aware of just how great a gift we have received – of just how lucky and blessed we are. Let us not neglect our duty.

Isn’t becoming blasé about it, becoming used to it and taking our treasure for granted, a bit like contemplating the “For Sale” sign?

Luckily for us, this possession cannot be sold, but it can lie dormant somewhere in a corner, like something hidden away in a cupboard, seldom used and often forgotten. What a waste! What negligence!

Let us wake up before it is too late. We do not know how much time was allotted to us for this lifetime. Let us fully realize our treasure and diligently polish it, guard it and try to comprehend it. It is beyond price.

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>December 2011 11</sub>

## A Question of Choice

The month of January is named after the Roman god Janus, an appropriate personification for the start of the new year. This particular Roman god had two faces so that he could look ahead toward the future and back at the past at the same time. As we get rid of an old year and look forward to a new one, let us all try to be a little like Janus.

We know through experience what we did wrong and what we did right, and hope to do better this year. A new year is unfolding – like a blossom with petals curled tightly, concealing the beauty within. This year let us make every effort to reveal the beauty of the divine light that is within all of us.

For satsangis, our primary focus in life is our spiritual duty, which is staying within the four principles. By following these principles we clean up our act, because God cannot reveal himself to a contaminated mind. These principles are the only way to break free from the karmic debts that shackle us to this material world, life after life, endlessly, like a hamster on a wheel.

In _The Path of the Masters_, the author explains that karma means the law of nature which requires that every doer shall receive the exact result or reward of his actions. That is the underlying principle of cause and effect. He writes:

> Directly applied, the law of karma demands that every living being … from amoeba to archangel, from mind and soul to the Creator of the Three Worlds – everyone must receive the exact balance of accounts, the precise compensation for each and every act. And so, this is karma.

There are three types of karma. Firstly, there is sinchit karma – this is the store of accumulated karmas of past births. The lord of karma may draw upon this store of karmas and assign it to be lived out at such times and places as he may determine. Once it has been drawn and assigned to the soul to go through in this life, it then becomes pralabdh karma, which is the second type of karma. This is fate or destiny karma which must be paid off in our current life. Thirdly, there is kriyaman, or new karma, which is the result of our choices that we are making from day to day during this life. We may reap its payment at once or at some future time during this life.

After our death what is left may be stored to be drawn upon in some future lifetime.

Karma, whether deliberate or inadvertent, has to be paid off. The Master teaches us to stop blaming our karmas; he tells us to treat every action we take as our own choice, which will create a new kriyaman karma. We have to act as if we’re sowing new seeds. With this attitude, we would not blame our behaviour on previous karmas, and we would take more responsibility for all our actions.

Everything may be the Lord’s will from the Lord’s perspective, but we cannot use that as an excuse not to make moral choices. After all, we’re still operating at the human level.

In what seemed to be a complete contradiction, Hazur Maharaj Ji once said that we have less free will than a puppet. If everything is predetermined, and we have no choice in the matter, then how can there be kriyaman karma, which is the result of our choices?

In _Mysticism, The Spiritual Path_, the author very eloquently explains this apparent contradiction. The following is paraphrased: Things of one plane are true and real for that particular plane, but in the higher light of a subtler plane the truths of the lower planes become deceptive and unreal. Therefore, from a higher plane, this physical world and its apparent truths become unreal and we cease to exist as separate beings.

Thus we can say that reality has levels. At the highest and final stage, reality is in its absolute truth and purity. There is no duality and all is the divine One, whole and indivisible, all-knowing and all-transcending.

For us human beings, this world is real – it _does_ exist, just as for the deluded mind, the world of delusion is a reality. For the mystics of the absolute stage, reality is the transcendent One; for us, it is this world of ever-changing multiplicity. Perfect mystics embrace the absolute reality of Oneness; we grope in relative reality or duality.

This settles the question of whether humans make their own choices, or whether everything is predestined and foreknown by an all-knowing God. Both can be true at the same time, for they are truths of different levels of reality.

Our existence as human beings and our free will are realities of the same order. They are real according to this plane, but unreal in the absolute truth of the highest region. Another reality of the lower planes is time – that is, the illusion of life unfolding in sequence. From the higher perspective, everything is taking place simultaneously, in the now.

The contradictions in mystics’ writings are thus due to the fact that they are truths of different planes. What is true at one stage may not be true at another. When we are in the physical world, free will and duality are the truth for us, but the final truth is still the absolute truth of all-knowing, transcendent Oneness.

What this means is that when Maharaj Charan Singh said that we have less free will than a puppet, he was speaking from the viewpoint of a perfect mystic who is always at the level of absolute truth. When the Master tells us that we always have a choice, he speaks to us at our own human level, and free will or choice is true at this stage of human understanding.

This entire material universe is made up of one or more of the four elements – of earth, air, fire and water. All the lower forms of life are possessed of all four elements, though some are dormant. In higher life forms like mammals all four of these elements are active. And the Masters tell us that we humans are the top of creation because we are the only creatures that have a fifth element, ether, which allows us discrimination or the capacity to make choices.

So human beings making their own choices as their lives unfold in time and space is the truth for this plane. While we are human beings in this universe of the elements, this is our reality.

The French philosopher Voltaire said:

> Each player must accept the cards life deals him or her: but once they are in hand, he or she alone must decide how to play the cards in order to win the game.

By way of explanation: the dealing of the cards is our pralabdh karma, the karma apportioned for this life, while the way we play the cards becomes our kriyaman karma, the karma we create every day.

Buddha said, “What we think, we become.” This means that every-thing that makes up our own personal lives was originally formed in our thoughts. Thoughts lead to actions and actions lead to reactions. This is an inescapable law. All Masters throughout the ages have taught this fact. It is the nature of the mind to give expression to our thoughts on the physical plane.

When we understand that we reap what we sow, then, in a sense, we sow whatever we wish to reap. If we think this is not true, think about how a person becomes a doctor or a lawyer. He has a thought of what he wishes to become, then he has to ‘sow’ the seeds of education in order to reap the rewards of qualifying. We are sowing and reaping almost every minute of the day. This sowing of crops can be as simple as deciding what to wear, or as complex as becoming a criminal and having to reap the crop of that karma for however many lifetimes.

In _The Book of Mirdad_ we read:

> Aye, Man invites his own calamities and then protests against the irksome guests, having forgotten how and when and where he penned and sent out the invitations. But Time does not forget; and Time delivers in due season each invitation to the right address; and Time conducts each invitee to the dwelling of the host.

Here Mirdad is stating that we may have made foolish choices in a previous life and then, in this life, we protest against our irksome guests – the karmic consequences of those choices.

People often say that if you believe in karma then you’re a fatalist, but the author of _The Path of the Masters,_ writing on karma, states:

> This great doctrine, instead of leading to a dull fatalism, is in fact the only teaching in the world that shows exactly how man is the architect of his own fortune, the creator of his own fate.

A fatalist is one who resigns himself to the fact that he has no power to control his future, and that everything that happens to him is just the ‘hand of cards’ that some higher power dished out to him. Whereas just the opposite is true: we are truly the architects of our own fortunes, the creators of our own fates.

Understanding that at this level we do have free will is very exciting, and we need to utilize this in our favour by choosing to earnestly attend to our daily meditation in an effort to break the fetters of our sinchit or reserve karmas. We need to decide what we want to happen at our moment of death – the choice is ours. We can choose to do our meditation every day. Meditation and the grace of initiation from the living Master are the only way to achieve liberation from reincarnation, and it is up to us to choose whether to meditate or not. The results of that choice will decide our future.

> We are undergoing our fate, in which we have no choice. But we do have the choice to work anew as we please, for our future.... We are, therefore, at present doing a dual function: In regard to fate, we are helpless, but in new actions we have a free hand to sow for the future.
> <sub>Maharaj Sawan Singh, _Spiritual Gems_</sub>

## Leaving Everything Else Aside

Maharaj Charan Singh has stated that this creation has been created “perfectly imperfect”. If it were not so, it could not continue, as the souls would be liberated. Kal has to make sure that no one escapes without paying the karmic account in full. Therefore the mind will ultimately use everything in its power to retard the soul’s progress. The mind will be led astray to get itself entangled in sowing and reaping, until such time as a marked soul is brought into the presence of a perfect living Master.

When that moment arrives, such a soul should lose no time in getting hold of the lifeline that is being given to him. If a seeker forfeits this ultimate gift of release from the wheel of birth and death
-reincarnation and transmigration – it might not easily come again. The privilege of the human form is given only after the soul has evolved through the cycle of 8,400,000 species, and who knows how many times a seeker might have already completed the cycle? Soami Ji says in _Sar Bachan_:

> Leaving everything else aside, one must implicitly obey the Satguru of his own time, and faithfully follow his instructions. This will lead him to success. This is the long and short of everything.

For an initiate this means that everything is finalized through initiation. Sant Mat tells us that our fate karma, some sinchit karmas and perhaps even some kriyaman karma have to be paid off in this life, and this can be done through steadfast meditation.

All that the Master asks of us is absolute obedience to the way of life he has prescribed, and daily meditation. This will earn us his grace, and his grace will break the bonds that tie us to the creation. It’s his grace that will help us clear our karmas. If the initiate implicitly obeys the Satguru, he cannot remain in this creation a moment longer than it takes to pay off the karmas. It is that simple.

Maharaj Charan Singh says that we should concentrate on simran, as ultimately this is what will take us to the Radiant Form of the Master. Simran is the repetition of the five holy names which are entrusted to us at the time of our initiation. This is our lifeline. Hazur Maharaj Ji has compared it to a child enjoying the fair, the worldly show, while holding on to his father’s hand. But when we let go of his hand, when we forget our simran, we feel unhappy and uncomfortable, lonely, and desperately lost. The moment simran continues, the sun shines through again.

Baba Jaimal Singh gives the following advice:

> Be concerned only with your meditation. The affairs of the world will take their own course; they just go on and never come to an end.… Bhajan and simran is our real work.… This will always remain with us, as it is the Satguru’s gift. This gift will grow, and never diminish.
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Letters_</sub></sub>

> You and other satsangis are urged to keep doing your bhajan and simran. If there are mosquitoes around, that’s good. At least you will get up at night to do your meditation!
> <sub><sub>_Spiritual Letters_</sub></sub>

## The Cruelty of God

In the _Mathnavi_ Rumi talks about the ‘cruelty’ of God, and describes it as the supreme grace. The cruelty that comes from God, he says, is worth more than a hundred acts of mercy.

> God’s worst cruelty is better than all the mercies of the two worlds.… In His cruelty lives hidden tenderness:
> To submit the soul to God out of love for Him Makes its essential life blaze and grow.
> <sub>Andrew Harvey, _Teachings of Rumi_</sub>

The very term ‘cruelty of God’ may sound a bit shocking to us. But what does Rumi mean when he talks about God’s cruelty? He is referring to that long-ago action when God separated all his souls from himself and sent them into exile – forcing them to go into a state of separation from himself. And one has to ask why such a drastic step should have ever have been necessary. What loving parent would ever want to throw his child out of his home, to live in a state of misery? Every single seeker who ever lived must have wanted an answer to that question!

Also in the _Mathnavi_ Rumi uses the analogy of a reed flute to describe the cry of the soul as it longs for the place from which it once came – the reed flute which sings its song of pain because it remembers how it was once torn from the reed bed and now longs to return there. We all know this soul-longing. It’s what brought us to the path and it’s what keeps us on the path. And it may well have made us wonder about the curious nature of the love of God.

Omar Khayyam was a monumental figure who lived in Persia in the eleventh century. He was a renowned mystic and also a mathematician, scientist, astronomer and philosopher. And he even devised a calendar said to have been more accurate than our present Gregorian calendar. But now, nine centuries later, he’s known mostly as the author of the famous _Rubhaiyyat_ from which we so often hear quotations. (“The moving finger writes and having writ, moves on …”, to give an example.)

In this same _Rubhaiyyat_ he complains to the Lord:

> This soul of mine was once thy cherished bride. What caused thee to divorce her from thy side? Thou didst not treat her thus of yore.
> Why then now doom her in the world to abide?
> <sub>_Rubhaiyyat of Omar Khayyam_, translated by Edward Whinfield</sub>

Maharaj Charan Singh used to tell us that the deep soul-loneliness we feel is in fact the hunger of the soul for its Lord, and that it will persist right up to the time that the soul is reunited with its Lord. This feeling, he said, has been deliberately planted in the heart of man.

Why would the Lord separate the soul from him and then make it grieve in its separation from him, stranded in this world where there is so much suffering? The mystics tell us that the Lord wanted the soul to love him. The Lord wants it to grow in consciousness, so that it could return the Lord’s love to him. In _The Dawn of Light_ Great Master explains it like this: that in the beginning our souls were comatose and the Creator wanted them to become fully conscious – by making them experience suffering.

So, in an odd kind of way, any pain that we might feel while stuck in this hostile world is really a blessing. If this world were a perfect place, we would probably be perfectly happy to stay here forever. It’s the loneliness and the suffering we experience down here in the creation that provides a strong motivation for us to work, to do our meditation, to escape from here.

Omar Khayyam tells us something quite startling: that we were the very reason this whole grand creation was brought into being. We were the lofty goal, he says, for which the creation was designed. We may see ourselves as small and unworthy, and at this stage that’s what we are, but we are the reason why all the universes and vast inner realms came into being!

> Man is the whole creation’s summary, The precious apple of great wisdom’s eye. The circle of existence is a ring
> Whereof the signet is humanity.

Just to create a scenario in which his precious souls could go through every conceivable type of experience and in the process eventually come to know and love him, the Creator devised the whole great play of creation. The idea is quite mind-boggling! And yet we can sense that it must be true.

Unfortunately, in the process of coming down to this low physical existence each soul has acquired coarse layers of mind, an astral body and finally a physical body equipped with senses that demand to be satisfied. And through actions at this level to keep the mind and senses happy we’ve become covered with karmic dirt. All this is blocking the soul from returning to a state of pure spirit, unless that dirt can be scrubbed and burnt off – through suffering or also, in our case, through meditation; and of course through the working of his blessed grace.

And while this is happening, the soul is suffering in the separation from its source.

For most of us it’s difficult to love God – and therefore long for him
-if we don’t _know_ God. It needs someone we can relate to at our human level, someone we can love because he is at our level; in other words the human form of our Master. And this is of course why we have a living Master – so that we can see him in all his glory and magnificence and fall in love with him; and then perhaps, through that love, come to yearn for him when we no longer have access to his beautiful physical form. Then we will mourn for him, Hazur Maharaj Ji says, and we’ll be the _fortunate_ ones who mourn for him.

And in the mean time the practical effect of this mourning is that it forces the disciple to meditate – to keep trying in the face of constant struggle to climb the steep slope to him: the only route he has given us to reach him.

Maharaj Ji tells us in _Die to Live:_ “In separation, the disciple will direct all his devotion and longing within to find the Master, and ultimately he will find the Comforter.” The Comforter meaning of course the Shabd, the Shabd from which the Radiant Form emerges as the form that we’ll recognize when we finally do reach that level within.

We’re repeatedly told that there _is_ no separation – that the Master is always with us, inside us. But still the feeling of separation may be there. And it seems that the Master might well _want_ us to feel separation from him. It seems that this may be necessary for the disciple – it’s good for him. It can create a yearning in him for his Beloved that’s a more powerful incentive than anything else to make us work to find him.

Love is a strange thing. When we’re young and naïve we tend to look at it through rose-tinted spectacles. Then life teaches us that it’s not all joy; it frequently brings with it a lot of heartache. The Masters go a step further. They tell us that love _always_ involves pain. That’s the real love: the love that knows both pleasure and pain.

In _Die to Live_ Hazur Maharaj Ji speaks about the pleasure in the pain:

> We have to pass through that agony of separation from the Father before we can achieve the happiness of union. But there is a pleasure in this pain. If you tell a lover or a devotee, “I would like to take this pain away from you,” he will never let you take it away. If it is so painful, why don’t they leave it? But they can’t. They don’t. They find pleasure in that pain.

We may have difficulty understanding this apparent contradiction.

But in a way it does make sense. Many of us have known the joy of being in the physical presence of our Master. And we’ve also known the ache of missing him when away from him. But in this missing him, painful though it may be, is a sharp memory of him – infinitely preferable to having no memory of him at all. In some way we _know_ that this missing him is valuable. It’s part of our spiritual unfolding. We would not want to lose it.

All our heartache, all our helpless struggles, all our self-blame, all our poor efforts to please our Master by trying to live the path as he has told us to do, all our sadness when we fail him – they’re all part of a long journey. All this is part of the growing of our soul into consciousness.

Rumi tells us:

> Don’t run away, accept your wounds and let bravery be your shield.
> It takes a thousand stages for the perfect being to evolve.
> <sub>Maryam Mafi and Azima Melita Kolin,</sub>
> <sub>_Rumi, Hidden Music_</sub>

> Maharaj Charan Singh
> <sub>December 2011 25</sub>

## Punctuality

Rai Sahib Munshi Ram was very punctual. If Great Master said: “We will leave at five in the morning,” at four-thirty Rai Sahib would be ready, completely packed and dressed, sitting on a chair waiting for the Master. He was so particular about anything you told him. But Great Master used to relax sometimes. If he said six o’clock, and somebody came, it might be seven before he was ready. But Rai Sahib would not tolerate it, he would say: “You told me six and I am ready.”

He would always call out in the morning: “I’m ready, Sir.” You could hear him from the Great Master’s house, where he would be waiting.

Great Master often used to say: “Rai Sahib will be coming, please let me go in time.”

<sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Heritage_</sub>

A skeptic asked a Master: “Is there any scientific evidence of what you talk about?”

The Master said: “If you believe, I am that evidence. If you practise, you shall be it.”
> <sub>Swamini Vimalananda Saraswati, _Meditation Techniques_</sub>

## Living in His Presence

The mind has been described as rain that keeps falling when the sky has cleared. It does what it has always done, no matter what the situation. Even at advanced stages of meditation, we are told the mind resists stillness, resists concentration and strives to maintain movement.

Every moment is a moment of truth. Those of us who are not spiritually evolved tend to separate our lives into a spiritual component and a worldly one. We dedicate a small portion of the day to spiritual practice, then get back as quickly as possible to business as usual – to normal life. Whereas meditation is quiet concentration, our normal life is distracted activity.

Of course, it is wrong thinking to compartmentalize life into meaningful and trivial elements. It is all critically important. If we cannot be totally focused in the moment, we can at least attempt to carefully observe and actually be aware of what is going on in our lives: what we do and say and think, how we react; how we deal with anxiety, what we find humorous or uplifting.

This kind of self-monitoring can become unnerving though, and it will remain so until we allow the Master to occupy a more permanent place in our moment-to-moment existence. When this happens, when we become centred in the awareness of his presence, then we start to understand that every moment is a moment of truth.

How would I behave in a specific situation if Master were there? Very differently from the usual impulsive, emotional, judgmental and careless way that has characterized my behaviour thus far. The Master is, of course, present at any given moment, so even if we cannot actually experience that reality in the fullest sense, we can develop an awareness of his presence simply in the knowledge that it is so.

This is partly faith, partly effort and partly his grace – the three pillars on which our spiritual progress is built. The objective is not merely to be a better-behaved person, but rather to be more spiritually conscious.

Maharaj Ji has urged us to allow the atmosphere generated during meditation to extend into our entire day. This means that our calmness, our focus and our longing should permeate our so-called normal lives. Our Master is with us not only spiritually but also mentally. In this way, sustained awareness becomes an ever-growing consciousness, which in turn, eventually manifests as the experience of living in his presence.

> As the physical body gets more involved in outside pursuits, the mind should be kept absorbed in simran. Listen to the Shabd-dhun every day – even if you do it only for ten minutes, it should be done every day. And understand undoubtingly that one day the Satguru will take you to Sach Khand. Read daily from the sacred writings, even if you read only one verse.
> <sub>Baba Jaimal Singh, _Spiritual Letters_</sub>

## The First Step

In the introduction to _Sar Bachan (Prose)_ we read what the final stage of our spiritual path will be like:

> Its primary attributes are wisdom, love and power; or as some prefer to name them, intelligence, joy and energy. This is the abode of the Supreme Creator and numberless hosts of pure spiritual beings possessed of unimaginable god-like greatness and splendour and enjoying the most intense happiness. This region is practically boundless, or limitless, in extent. It knows neither death nor change nor any imperfection.

Those who are initiated can experience it in this life. It is not a distant pipe dream – it is realizable in this lifetime. When we were accepted for initiation by the living Satguru, one of the criteria for choosing us was that we have the potential to make the transition during this very life. Our karmic load was light enough and we had enough love, which meant that we had the potential to make the transition from this pain-filled world to a state of pure intense happiness. Not only do we have a human birth, but we have also been granted the gift of initiation – we are a few among the many.

Consider how rare this is. If we stop for a moment and become aware of this, we will realize that we have already made gigantic progress on the path. There is now actually very little between us and supreme happiness – only a conditioned mind still blocks the light.

The Master has given us the method to break through the barrier of the mind: to focus the attention and experience this state as a real and permanent experience, an unimaginable godlike greatness and splendour. An intense happiness will result from the practice of bringing the mind to stillness and then tuning our attention into the life force, the sound current and following it to its source – a state of absolute purity.

Standing back and looking at the situation objectively, one would think that we would be practising day and night, and for most of us that was the intention at the beginning. But it didn’t work out that way. The mind proved to be unruly and stubborn and the effort needed proved to be too much. At the time of initiation we thought that, unlike all these other slackers, we would be enlightened by the week after next at the latest! But after a while, the promise of four lifetimes as the most it would take to make the journey looked like our only hope. Yet when the Master is asked about ‘four lifetimes’ he has answered that he knows nothing of four lifetimes, there is only this lifetime!

As the clichéd and familiar statement says – the journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step. It’s time to take that step. After many years of initiation, some of us are still at the starting point on the path. We are staring into the distance trying to see the wonders that lie ahead and despairing that nothing has come into view. That is because we are missing the fundamental step – that of taking the first step.

For some of us our history on the path goes back decades. The intellectual grasp of death and the desire for a really meaningful spiritual experience led a lot of us to the path when the empty promises of salvation by religious structures failed us. For those of us who started out in the 1960s and 1970s, we now had a real guru and a real meditation practice. We were streets ahead of others, or so it seemed – except the scenery was not changing.

We have strictly followed the vegetarian diet, attended lots of satsangs, improved our morality and had years of getting up for an attempt at meditation – why? Because our Master has told us that we can make the whole journey to our source in this very lifetime. As unlikely as it seems, this means that we could one day become fully realized, superconscious beings in a state of perfect bliss – God-realized.

Stop for a moment and get past the familiarity of the promise. See that this is a definite possibility! Most of us have settled into the fact that it is not really going to happen any time soon, but the Master reassures us it _can_ happen. Why then are we still here after such a long time? Because we wander in the vast unending unreality of our mind and we are unaware of it.

If we are not aware of the mind and its virtual reality, how can we tell, even as a satsangi, what is real and what is fantasy? How do we tell whether we are experiencing reality or whether the mind is simply creating fantasy? Simran can separate reality from fiction inside, but what if we are still some distance from inside? We are like a fish in water, unaware that we are living in water. Our experience beyond the water cannot even be thought about because we would have to be aware of the water first. It is the same with the mind.

What is the mind? Where does it begin and where does it end? All our experiences are in the mind, so how do we actually know that the way out is not just another mind experience?

The Masters tell us that the way out is through the eye centre and into the spiritual realms beyond, riding on the sound current, but after all these years we may still have no inner experience. We may get discouraged at the lack of inner experience, but still we will have the faith to continue and to please him. And we will become more conscious of what we are doing – which is to try and stop the mind, to remove its power to delude us, and to enter into the inner world and make the journey to pure consciousness.

When we cannot tell the difference between reality and mind fantasy, the need for an experienced guide is a vital necessity. He has explained the way out, given us instructions and offered to lead the way. The first step is to stop getting lost in the mind, for the way does not lie in the mind but past the mind. This is the barrier we face. No amount of intellectual manoeuvring is going to take us any distance along the way because the intellect, which is the reasoning power of the mind, cannot be threatened into submission. It must first be satisfied; then we are able to follow the path and do our meditation without doubts. Beyond that it is only of value in carrying out our worldly work.

The practice as taught by the Masters is the practical way of saving our consciousness or attention from being lost out here in a state of endless misery. We are trapped in the wheel of reincarnation. When we were born we were dealt a hand of cards. We now have to play it to win, and Baba Ji tells us we _can_ win. The hand of cards is our karma – our fate for this life. We have a certain degree of choice in what we do – in how we play our hand. We don’t have absolute free will but we do have conditioned free will. This emotive subject of free will is used by some to explain away or justify their situation and lack of progress. Those who take this approach do not do themselves any favours.

Maharaj Ji explains conditioned free will by saying that our will is conditioned by our birth circumstances. He points out how different someone’s outlook and reaction would be if they were born in Russia or the United States. We are trapped in a conditioned mind, and the intellect has to be satisfied for the mind to escape the prison of conditioning. This is possible – and the first step is to see the value of the path of the Masters. The second is to request guidance on the path from the Master. The third is to walk the path according to the directions given by the guide – the perfect living Master. Most of us are likely to have met the first two conditions. It is now a case of taking the first step on our journey inward.

The method of the Masters is to still the mind – not to sort it out but to still it. Most of our problems exist in the mind, so to try and sort out our problems with the mind is a bit like washing the dirt out of our clothes in muddy water. Still the mind and we still the troubles. The Masters advise us to stop all this analyzing and not to be waylaid by the mind. They teach us that meditation is the first step to stilling the mind, and this is done with simran.

Take the first step. Give it priority in your life because it is the way. Take advantage of this great gift from which we can uncover our godlike greatness and experience the most intense happiness, rather than whatever it is we experience in our daily lives now. This godlike greatness and intense happiness should be our fundamental reality.

Right from the beginning of our journey on the path, we can get a taste of the huge rewards of doing our meditation.

> Meditation is the highway of the wise to Enlightenment. The basic idea is to go inside ourselves effortlessly and in silence and to progressively reach quieter levels of the mind until we transcend and experience the quietest level, the Absolute. Through repeated practice we become very well acquainted with the Absolute and we start to make that our existential home. With time and practice, transcendence becomes a perpetual daily reality where we experience this silent world of bliss together with our normal daily routine. This is Enlightenment and with this new way of living comes the wonderful ability to cheerfully and effectively deal with everyday life while living a fulfilling and joyful inward life.
> <sub>Gustav Barnard, _A Simple Plan for Enlightenment_</sub>

## Sant Mat Made Simple

The mind has complicated our meditation, our simran, our way of life and everything else for us – when it is actually all so very simple. To see it as easy, all we need to do is shift to a positive attitude.

Take for instance ‘going inside’. When we close our eyes and look at the darkness inside, then we are inside at the eye centre, but the mind by habit slips out and down almost immediately. The effort needed now is to repeatedly and patiently pull it back, until it becomes natural for it to sit still in the centre looking at the darkness. This darkness is caused in fact by our looking inside at the black sky in which the light, the stars, the sun, moon and the Radiant Form of the Master will eventually appear. But first the attention must be fully collected and focused in this darkness.

When we look at something outside, we see it because the attention flows from the eye centre, through the physical organ of the eyes, to the object that we are looking at, and we see it effortlessly. When we close our eyes and see the blackness inside, we have reversed the flow of attention from outside to inside. Now hold it there inside. It is the attention that is seeing inside, just as effortlessly as it was seeing outside.

The physical eyes cannot see the darkness inside. They need light to see. The ears can’t perceive the darkness, nor can the tongue taste it, neither can it be felt by the sense of touch. We are now inside. Hold the attention there in that darkness and, being there, repeat the Master’s holy names slowly and with love, with the full attention of the mind.

This simran or repetition of his names impresses upon the mind the darshan of the Master. If we think of the name of anyone we know, his face is projected before the mind’s eye. When we call the Master by his real names, his face appears before us. We should not think of the names as just mere names, but as the Master’s real names in the five major regions inside, infused with his power, to which he will always respond without fail.

This approach to seeing meditation and going inside as being extremely easy is possible when we strictly embrace and treasure the Master’s four great gifts to us, which we normally call the four vows or principles of the path. And what a great gift each of these principles is!

Just imagine what grace it is to be saved from the cruel and barbaric habit of eating meat, with all its incumbent dulling and disease-forming effects. Not even to speak of the enormous load of bad karmas that we are spared from. Just think how blessed we are to be saved from the effects and consequences of consuming alcohol and perhaps becoming addicted to habit-forming drugs, which at best eventually leave us physical and mental wrecks. And then to be given the proper guidance on how to live clean, upright and morally sound lives, which purifies and ennobles us and brings us so much closer to him. And we are given the supreme gift – we are shown how to do at least two and a half hours of meditation every day, after being connected to the Shabd or Sound. These are four great gifts from the Master with a value beyond compare.

It really is all so straightforward and simple. If we adopt a positive attitude we will realize this, and we will find in practice that this is actually so. Don’t allow the mind to tell you otherwise.

Always keep things sweet and simple. Obey the Satguru implicitly. Sit down and just do your meditation. If the Master says that two and a half hours of meditation every day will please him, then try to give at least that, and if possible, a bit more. For when we can please him, what more is there for us to do?

> Maharaj Sawan Singh
> <sub>36 Spiritual Link</sub>

## Time

Some of us are always keeping time, some finding time, some making time, some spending time, some catching up with time, some fighting for time, some arriving early and some running late. Some are having a good time, some going through bad times, some rising at an auspicious time, some abstaining from activities at an inauspicious time, some doing things at the right time, some arriving on the dot, some remembering the good old times and some looking forward to better times.

Some are clocking hours, some counting days, some dying for time and some say they have no time to die! Strange that this man-made clock-time seems so real and has such a sway over us.

Time is a concept created and sustained by the mind. We divide it into the past and future with reference to the present. However, the past and future are known to us only in the present. When the past occurred, it occurred as the present and when the future occurs, it will occur only as the present.

Therefore the present, this moment here and now, is the very essence of time. Ignoring this essence, is not all discussion on the past and future laughable, like counting without the number one?

Thus to live in the past or future is to deny the very essence of time and life, the here and now.… The present too is timeless and therefore beginningless and endless. The essence of the present is the pure Presence or Awareness, the ‘I’ that gives existence to the very concept of time. This presence or ‘I’ can only be experienced here and now, never as ‘there’ or ‘then’. ‘I am’ is the essence of all our experiences.

<sub>Swamini Vimalananda Saraswati, _Meditation Techniques_</sub>

## The Golden Age

According to Hindu Scriptures the passage of time is divided into four yugas or ages, each lasting an indescribably long time. They call the first age the Golden Age and describe it as a time when truth and contemplation are dominant. People live very long lives in harmony and tranquility. This age is followed by the Silver Age, when lives are shorter, and charity and sacrifice play the dominant role. Then comes the Copper Age when human lives are even shorter still and characterised by idol worship and acts of piety. Lastly comes the Iron Age. This is a time characterised by discord and strife and people live very short lives, generally filled with negative emotion and aggression.

The Masters tell us that we are now in an Iron Age and, no doubt, we would agree with that as a description of the world in which we find ourselves. True, there is some beauty, kindness, love and compassion to be found all around us – in our own lives, in the lives of people we know and in our environment. However, we would probably have to agree that strife, discord, hunger, enmity, poverty, misery and disease seem to characterise our world more accurately than love and harmony.

Therefore it might come as something of a surprise to be told: _Now_ is the Golden Age. For us, this is the truth.

Soami Ji, the first of the Radha Soami line of Masters, has this to say:

> The three ages of gold, silver and copper have passed without any of us knowing the method of Shabd practice. In the Iron Age, Radha Soami, in His mercy, has openly made known the secret of Shabd.
> <sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry._</sub>

Soami Ji tells us that even though the three happier ages have passed, our souls are still here because we did not know the method of Shabd practice. The Masters tell us that release from the cycle of transmigration can only come about through Shabd practice. A soul must be accepted for initiation by the perfect living Master of his time and then, by following the Master’s instructions, he will gain emancipation from birth and rebirth and enter his own personal Golden Age, an age that precedes reunion with the Creator in Sach Khand.

In previous ages the Masters were very selective when accepting disciples. There were rigorous tests disciples had to pass before being deemed fit for initiation. The conditions of life may have been more harmonious and peaceful, but the soul was as trapped as it is now in the Iron Age.

Fortunately for us, things have now changed. Now, in the Iron Age when existence itself is often a trial and an ordeal, the rules have been relaxed and most people who apply for initiation, after meeting certain basic and relatively simple criteria, are accepted. The ills and miseries of the Iron Age are deemed to be so great that the Masters have taken pity on souls and lowered the requirements for initiation. This is a boon beyond our comprehension.

The Masters have never been as active, as visible or as accessible as they are today. Their teachings have been published and distributed throughout the world in dozens of different languages. This is a great boon to mankind.

Still, people will say, the Iron Age _is_ a time of ugliness, brutish behaviour and misery. How can anything about it be described as golden? Perhaps it is a question of perspective and attitude. How can we appreciate beauty if we have never seen ugliness? How would we understand the value of good if we could not compare it with bad? What would light mean without darkness?

This is a world of duality. And it is this very state of the world that makes us yearn to leave and find something better. We have been given glimpses of beauty, peace and love, and long for more. Who knows how hungry for this ideal state we would be, were it not for the negativity that we see all around us. It is possible that we would not have searched for, nor as eagerly embraced, the path of Sant Mat with its promise of a true Golden Age, were it not for our dissatisfaction with the Iron Age.

Within our personal lives the same principles of duality apply. Our soul longs to return home to Sach Khand, to perfect peace, joy and love. This, however, is a state of utter purity, cleanliness and beauty.

Who of us fit that description in our present state? We need some serious cleaning up! Perhaps we need darkness to seek light, perhaps pain is the scrubbing brush required to cleanse us of impurities. Our Master wants to get the job done now, so any scrubbing that may be going on in our lives should be gratefully welcomed.

Turning within, to the world of spirit, can only be done with the help of a perfect living Master. Anybody who has met a Master and heard his teachings knows of this escape route. The only questions that remain to be asked are: What are we doing with this gift? As satsangis stepping out of the darkness of the Iron Age into the splendour of our own Golden Age, how are we saying ‘thank you’? Are we living the lives of true satsangis, or are we resting on our laurels?

Soami Ji offers us these words:

> Anyone who sings Radha Soami’s Name will swim across the ocean of existence. All conflict will end, all pain and agony will cease and they will find peace.
> Rarely does anyone know the secret of that boundless Name.
> But the ones who do reach the far shore, never to be reborn into this world.
> <sub>_Sar Bachan Poetry_</sub>

In other words, we’re promised permanent exit from the Dark Age and entry into the Golden Age. There are no ‘maybe’s’ here. He says: “will swim”. “will end”, “will cease” and “will find”. This end result is not open to speculation. The Master guarantees that his disciples _will_ “reach the far shore, never to be reborn into this world.”

However, he does not say, “I’ll initiate you and take you home. Just sit back and enjoy the ride!” He says, “Work with me. Cooperate fully on the journey.”

Are we doing that? What have we got to do in order to cooperate fully? In short, we have to adapt our lives in order to make the path our priority.

It all starts with meditation, of course, and the Master’s grace. It means planning one’s day in such a way that there are two and a half hours available for meditation. The present Master is often heard to say that disciples don’t have a time problem, we have a focus problem. We will happily prioritise and focus on worldly issues; set time aside for family and worldly concerns, but not give our meditation the same focus.

We all too easily allow worldly activities to compromise those meditation hours. We watch television or read until too late, or eat a heavy meal too late at night. Our whole day must be structured in such a way that we find ourselves in tip-top condition for our meditation sessions. They are not a chore; they are the privileged hours we share consciously with Master. Meditation is our own personal haven in the midst of the Iron Age. It is time out with our Master where, with practice, we can access peace, tranquility and profound joy.

Once the meditation is done, then the rest of the day looms like a wild horse needing to be tamed. Let’s say we spend six hours asleep and two or three hours sitting. That leaves about fifteen hours to live for our Master in a way that is a credit to him.

The pattern of our daily lives is shaped by the karmas allotted for us for this lifetime. But now we have to ensure that we don’t add more to our karmic debt. We have to be strict vegetarians and avoid meat, fish, chicken, eggs, alcohol and drugs. We must never relax our vigilance. Leading a pure, clean, moral life in thought, word and deed is where things can go haywire. It means we must earn our living honestly, declare our income honestly to the taxman, never try to wriggle out of paying our dues at all times. It means we must keep our very thoughts clean and pure. It means we have to strive every day to follow the example the Master holds up before us.

However, he knows we are not yet perfect and he understands our limitations. What he wants from us is constant effort at meditation, at improvement of attitude. He wants us to discriminate between good and bad and choose the good.

And we have to learn to accept his will cheerfully and gratefully. He is now in charge of our destiny and every single thing that happens to us, happens with his love and approval. Everything that comes to us is an opportunity for acceptance, gratitude and submission to his will. In this way worries, fears and problems of all sorts fade away and are transmuted into gifts from him; iron is turned into gold.

## Milk and Eggs

One of the most commonly asked questions when we first come to this path is: Both milk and eggs are animal products, so why are we allowed to drink milk but not eat eggs – even if they are not fertilized and would therefore not interrupt a life cycle?

To answer that question logically, let’s first discuss ‘tattvas’, which we might roughly translate as ‘elements’.

In _A Treasury of Mystic Terms,_ the author explains that the word ‘tattvas’ can be rendered as ‘elements’, though they’re something very different from chemical elements. A tattva is the primary element of the essence of matter, of which this creation is made – everything that exists on the physical plane. The highest essence is ultimate reality or God himself. The basic elements of earth, air, fire, water and ether, are generally seen as referring to the gross state of matter found in the physical world, but we should understand that in the context of Sant Mat all are a reflection of more subtle states.

All elements are present in all the 8,400,000 species of this creation.

Species are divided up according to the number of elements ‘active’ within each, the other elements being present but ‘dormant’.

Let us consider the active elements in some of the known species:
-
Vegetables have only one active element: water – the other four being dormant.
-
Insects and their eggs have two active elements: fire and air.
-
Fish and their eggs have two active elements: fire and water.
-
Reptiles and their eggs have two active elements: fire and earth.
-
Birds and their eggs have three active elements: water, fire and air.
-
Mammals have four active elements: water, fire, air, and earth. They lack only ether, which gives the power of discrimination.
-
Humans, and only humans, have all five elements active in them: water, earth, fire, air and ether. Ether is the element from which all other elements are derived. Humans are therefore called ‘the top of creation’, the only species having the power of discrimination.

All life subsists on life in this world. In order for us to survive, something else has to die, and this carries a karmic debt. This is why the Masters instruct their disciples to abstain from eating flesh foods, including fertilized or unfertilized eggs.

Eggs, whether they are fertilized or not, may be regarded as part of the reproductive system of their species. They have as many active elements as the species that produced them and they carry the same karmic debt.

Milk is not a part of a mammal’s reproductive system but a nutrient provided by the cow for the calf, which we can share without harming the cow or the calf. There is no karma in drinking milk, and therefore the Masters do permit the use of milk.

We must realize that when the Master says that an element is ‘active’, this activity is provided by the divine power. Therefore the more elements that are active, the more active the divine power is in keeping that plant or creature alive. This has a direct bearing on the consequences of karmic interaction which is responsible for keeping souls bound to the creation. The higher the life form taken, the greater the karma that will be incurred.

Of course karma is not the only factor that determines whether a soul will be tied to the creation indefinitely. Divine mercy and grace may allow any soul to be marked to return to the Father, even in this lifetime. But the Master asks us to condition our bodies and our minds to make such a return easier by following a vegetarian diet and living a wholesome life.

This mind-body conditioning is necessary, not only for our health, but also for our peace of mind and the ability to concentrate our attention, all of which are necessary to meditate. Meditation is the _camino real_, the royal road that turns the attention toward the Sound, the Shabd, by means of which the Masters take their disciples to levels of higher consciousness, and ultimately back to the Father.

The law of karma is very clearly expressed in the Bible in such words as: “for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap” (Galatians 6:7), and “an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth” (Exodus 21:23, 24; Matthew 5:38).

No, that does not mean that people are exhorted to exact revenge.

This means that we must pay for every atom that we take from this creation, and collect every atom owed us, before we can leave the creation and attain liberation.

Our Master will always do his job and he will certainly take us out of this creation and back to the Father, but we must cooperate by leading an honest life, by taking the least possible from this creation, and by doing our meditation.

## The Loincloth

In _Divine Light_ Maharaj Ji tells us that if a bee sits on the rim of a cup filled with honey, it can enjoy the sweet taste of the honey and can also fly away safely. But if it were to sit in the cup itself, it would lose both the honey as well as its life. “Thus,” he says, “we must live on the edge of the world as a spectator and not allow ourselves to be drowned in its sensual pleasures.”

It is so easy to be sucked into the world, as one action leads to another. This is explained in the following short story told by the Catholic mystic Anthony de Mello, in _The Prayer of the Frog_:

A guru was so impressed by the spiritual progress of his disciple that, judging he needed no further guidance, he left him on his own in a little hut on the bank of a river.

Each morning after his ablutions the disciple would hang his loin-cloth out to dry. It was his only possession! One day he was dismayed to find it torn to shreds by rats. So he had to beg for another from the villagers. When the rats nibbled holes in this one too, he got himself a kitten. He had no more trouble with the rats but now, in addition to begging for his own food, he had to beg for milk as well.
“Too much trouble begging,” he thought, “and too much of a burden on the villagers. I shall keep a cow.”

When he got the cow, he had to beg for fodder: “Easier to till the land around my hut,” he thought. But that proved troublesome too, for it left him little time for meditation. So he employed labourers to till the land for him. Now overseeing the labourers became a chore, so he married a wife who would share the task with him. Before long, of course, he was one of the wealthiest men in the village.

Years later his guru happened to drop by and was surprised to see a palatial mansion where once a hut had stood. He said to one of the servants, “Isn’t this where a disciple of mine used to live?”

Before he got a reply, the disciple himself emerged. “What’s the meaning of all this, my son?” asked the guru.

“You’re not going to believe this, sir,” said the man, “but there was no other way I could keep my loincloth!”

> Let us consider what we need. We need food for our stomach, clothes to cover our body, and some kind of roof over our head. By retreating from the world, will our stomach stop demanding food? Will we no longer need clothes, or a roof over our head? We will have relinquished the earnings of our own honest labour and the food of our own homes, only to hold out our hands like beggars for others to fill our stomach.
> <sub>Maharaj Charan Singh, _Spiritual Discourses, Vol. II_</sub>

## Book Review

**Spiritual Perspectives: Maharaj Charan Singh Answers Questions, 1960-1990**

By Maharaj Charan Singh

Publisher: Beas, India, Radha Soami Satsang Beas, 2010. ISBN: 978-81-8256-931-7

“Any questions, please?” With these words Maharaj Charan Singh Ji opened countless question-and-answer sessions during the nearly thirty-nine years he served as master. These words were his open invitation to his disciples and seekers to interact with him and voice their concerns, confusion and doubts. With infinite patience, Maharaj Ji attended to each person, offering spiritual perspectives on whatever issues troubled them.

From 1960 onwards, many hundreds of Maharaj Charan Singh’s question-and-answer sessions in English, for audiences mostly from the West, were tape-recorded in various ways, formal and informal. The sessions took place all over the world – at Dera, Delhi, Mumbai and on foreign tours. Collecting, digitally restoring, transcribing and verifying all these tapes and then selecting and topically organizing material from them for the book was the work of hundreds of sevadars over more than two decades. The published collection also incorporates most of the questions and answers previously included in the books _The Master Answers_ and _Thus Saith the Master._ The resulting three-volume work, _Spiritual Perspectives_, is without a doubt a monumental addition to the world’s mystical literature. With it we gain a lifetime of the teachings of a great contemporary mystic, and in near-verbatim form as they emerged during his everyday, informal and personal exchanges with disciples.

The first volume of the work, titled _Understanding the Basics_, covers such topics as the mystery of creation, karma, the role of the master and the relationship of the soul with God. The second volume, _Walking the Path_, includes topics like personal commitment, the practice of meditation, effort and grace, and the constant struggle with the mind.

The third volume, _Living the Life_, presents the master’s answers on subjects such as satsang, seva, living a balanced life and the relationship of disciple and master.

Maharaj Ji’s answers address the most profound truths of Sant Mat, with sublime eloquence, but always in simple, easy-to-understand language. For example, when describing Sant Mat as “the teachings of the saints,” he explains who saints or masters are with an analogy:

> You have seen the waves in the ocean. They all arise from the ocean. They merge back into the ocean. Every wave is different from one another, and yet they have roots in the same ocean, they are part of the same ocean, so they are all one. Anything you throw into any wave, the wave will take it to the bottom of the sea. The sea is the same; no matter which wave carries that article, it will carry it to the bottom of the sea. So all masters are just waves of that ocean. We submit ourselves to the masters, and they carry us to that ocean.

As another example, when once a questioner suggested that “no matter how much effort we put into it or how hard we try, if the time is not right, we will never get home,” Maharaj Ji responded:

> Brother, it is just like this: A beggar comes to your door to ask you for alms, but first he wants to be assured that he is going to get something from the house before knocking at the door. Otherwise, he is not going to beg. This is a wrong attitude. We are all beggars at the Lord’s door. We have to beg.… And I assure you, if we really beg from our heart, he is always ready to give. If we come one step, he comes ten steps to receive us.

His answers were very practical, such as in discussing how we are to live our everyday lives. His fundamental message was to live at peace within ourselves:

> Everybody is miserable in separation – though some may be comfortable in their misery – so they want to find peace within themselves. When we are able to achieve that peace within ourselves, wherever we go, we will radiate peace. If you go to a happy person, he will make you happy in no time; if you go to a miserable person, he will make you miserable in no time. So first we must obtain that peace within ourselves; we must live with ourselves.

_Spiritual Perspectives_ conveys the substance of Maharaj Charan Singh’s teachings on many subjects, but much else as well. Those who were privileged to hear Maharaj Ji speak will be reminded here, even from the printed answers, of his charming manner of expression. A turn of phrase, an image, a story frequently employed will stir the memory of his voice. Even perusing the Table of Contents one recalls his vivid use of language from section headings: “Give him any name,” “Arresting the teachings,” “Digest it within” or “Swim along with the waves.”

No matter how familiar one is with Maharaj Ji’s books and audiotapes, _Spiritual Perspectives_ will offer many surprises. For example, once when the master was asked about the idea that every initiate would complete the spiritual journey in no more than four lives, he said:

> You see, Soami Ji explains it. One life is for devotion and love of the master. The second life is just for attending to meditation and merging into the shabd and nam, just to live in the nam, always intoxicated with that nectar, with that shabd and nam. The third life is for going across Trikuti, to the second and third stage, from where you don’t have to take birth again at all. And the fourth birth is for going back, straight up. That is what the Lord devised, but he does not mean that we have to take four lifetimes. It means if you take it very slow, even then you’ll be able to cover the journey within four lifetimes. If one can run, if one can go at jet speed, so much the better.

Many readers will simply read the volumes from start to finish, cover to cover. But also, for anyone seeking answers on particular subjects, the volumes offer comprehensive indexes. Since in an answer addressing one theme Maharaj Ji would often touch on other themes as well, the index is essential for a reader investigating a single topic. The index also includes references to phrases, metaphors or stories that Maharaj Ji commonly used, an unusual feature giving the reader another way to locate an answer, perhaps one vaguely remembered from a tape or from hearing it in person. For example, under “withdrawal” is listed “analogy of cloth and thorny bush,” under “separation” appears the “story of Mira Bai and her love for her guru” and under “relationship to God” is “analogy of child at fair.”

As much as it reveals the teachings, _Spiritual Perspectives_ reveals the intimate and loving connection Maharaj Charan Singh formed with his sangat from abroad. As he himself said, these question-and-answer sessions were just an excuse for master and disciples to spend time together:

> I am quite conscious that many people don’t have a question, even when they come to ask a question. And even if they do have questions, they are not interested in the answer, and they don’t want any answer. And whatever answer I may give them makes no difference to them. They only want to talk; they only want to keep me here; they only want to hear me. I am quite conscious of it.… So this game is going on. And I know every day it will be the same. It’s not one session or two sessions, or one meeting or two meetings. For the past thirty-five years, this question-and-answer is going on. No dearth of books have been printed, no dearth of tapes recorded; same questions, same answers.… I don’t know what is the reason, but it is going on. They want to be here and I want to be with them; they want to be with me, and we are here. You can explain it in any way.

<sub>Book reviews express the opinions of the reviewers and not of the publisher.</sub>

## His Presence

Often while travelling on the spiritual path, there are times when we are challenged with the onslaught of karmas that come our way. These karmas may be with family, friends, work or even with our meditation. At those times we may ask ourselves, “Does he really know what I am going through, does he know how difficult life is?”

Maharaj Charan Singh in _Spiritual Perspectives, Vol. III,_ says:

> Your Master is always within you. He is not anywhere outside at all. We should try to reach him, seek him who is our constant companion. He never leaves us, though we may leave him.… We are never alone – our Master is always with us.

What an incredible concept this is! The thought that wherever we are, whatever we are doing, whatever karmas come our way, he is “always with us” and guiding, supporting and encouraging us from within. He is our nearest and dearest friend. He is nearer to us than the hairs on our head.

Hazur continues in the same volume of _Spiritual Perspectives:_

> We can shut everybody out, but we can’t shut him out. The Lord is everywhere. We can’t deceive him. We can’t shut him out. He is always watching us, whether we are conscious of it or not. If we could realize this spiritual truth – that there is one Lord; he is within everyone of us and the path leading back to him also is within; and whatever we do, we are being watched and have to account for that to him – I think everybody’s life would change in a second.
